The Long Oral Lineage of the Nyingmapas
A Teaching Given by Kyabje Dudjom Rinpoche at the Dharma Center of Kalimpong When Bestowing the Transmission of the Cycle of the Nyingma Kahma, Early December 196210
My dear Dharma friends, I would like to give you a short historical outline describing the main features of the cycle of the Nyingma Kahma,11 the teachings belonging to the long lineage of oral transmission. The question has been asked recently whether the kahma teachings are the same as the Kagyupa teachings. This is not at all the case. In general, the terms Nyingma and Sarma, old and new, are used with reference to the earlier and later translations of the sacred Dharma, and only in the context of Tibetan Buddhism.12 From the point of view of Indian Buddhism, they have no meaning.
The Buddha’s doctrine was first disseminated in Tibet during the reign of King Trisong Detsen and his sons. At that time, the great Indian pandita and abbot Shantarakshita, the great master Padmasambhava, the great pandita Vimalamitra, and others, as well as the translators Vairotsana, Kawa Peltsek, Chokro Lui Gyaltsen, Ma Rinchen Chok, Nyak Jñana Kumara, and the rest—a hundred panditas and translators in all—met together and translated many texts of both sutra and tantra. These texts were definitively checked and ratified by exegesis, study, meditation, and practice, and came to be referred to as Nyingma, the “old translations.”13
Subsequently, these teachings were suppressed by Langdarma, and Tibet was annihilated as a land of Dharma. In the western province of Ngari, however, the royal lineage survived, and during the reigns of the lama-king Yeshe Ö and his brother, the work of translating Buddhist texts was begun again by Rinchen Zangpo and others.14 All the translations made during and after that period are referred to as Sarma—the “new translations.”
Nowadays it seems that some people are saying that the Nyingmapas have no sutra teachings, and the Sarmapas are without the tantra. Such people have no learning and are ignorant of the Dharma. The Nyingmapas and the Sarmapas both possess the complete path of the sutras and tantras. In recent times also, some people, claiming to be erudite but with evil intentions, have been saying that the present Nyingma teachings have no authentic origins. They say that the Dharma had completely degenerated by the time of Langdarma, and that the kahma and terma teachings as they exist today are just our own invention. As a result, certain unlearned, weak-minded people have been led into doubt, thinking that such rumors might be true. The real situation, however, is quite different.
When Langdarma attempted to destroy the teachings, he completely suppressed the monastic order. He was unable, however, to harm the tantric lay practitioners, for he was afraid of the power of the great yogi Nubchen Sangye Yeshe.15 The yogis were also protected by the fact that they did not have the outer distinguishing marks of the ordained sangha, and obviously no one was in a position to know that they were vessels of the Dharma, holding it within their minds. So it was that the white-robed lay tantrikas perfectly preserved the texts of both the sutras and the tantras, upholding them through exegesis, study, meditation, and practice. It was by this means that they succeeded in keeping the Secret Mantra alive. Thanks to their kindness, these teachings, which are like a wish-fulfilling jewel, exist to this day, and can still be found and practiced.
While Langdarma was pursuing his work of destruction, three disciples of the great abbot Shantarakshita, namely Mar, Yo, and Tsang, escaped to Kham in eastern Tibet. Following Langdarma’s death, it was they who bestowed monastic ordination on Lachen Gongpa Rabsel and ten other men from the provinces of Ü and Tsang. This marks the beginning of the later spread of the Dharma in Tibet. Not long after, the great translator Rinchen Zangpo appeared and gradually there followed all the other translators of the Sarma, or new tradition. The Kadampa, Sakyapa, Kagyupa, and other transmission lineages slowly spread.16 Following the Kadampas, the Lord Tsongkhapa founded the tradition of Riwo Ganden, or Gelugpa. Starting from the second half of the reign of the lama-king Yeshe Ö, the line of Nyingma tertöns, or treasure discoverers, began to appear.17
Our Nyingma teachings may be divided into the kahma teachings of the long oral lineage and the terma, or treasure texts, of the short lineage. The kahma embodies the teachings that have been transmitted from mouth to ear, from Samantabhadra right down to our present root teachers, without interruption. Within this cycle, the principal teachings18 are the mahayoga tantra, The Phantasmagorical Net; the anuyoga tantra, The Essential Compilation; and the atiyoga teachings, which correspond to the tantras, their commentaries, and the essential instructions.19 The printed canon of Nyingma tantras contains over 440 different texts.20 There exists an enormous number of other tantras that are not included in this printed collection.
In addition to this, Guru Rinpoche lovingly devised a sustaining remedy for the doctrine and beings living in the decadent, evil times of later centuries. He concealed wonderful treasures of teaching, together with riches and samaya substances in the snow mountains, rocks, and lakes. As time unfolds and when the moment is ripe, treasure discoverers, who are emanations of Guru Rinpoche’s realized disciples, open up the hidden treasures and disseminate the teachings contained therein. These teachings constitute what we refer to as the short lineage of terma. Its principal subjects are the sadhanas of the Eight Great Herukas,21 the Embodiment of Wisdom,22 and the sadhanas of Vajrakila.23 These comprise the various practices of the creation and perfection stages, yogic activities, rituals, and pith instructions. Up to the present time, hundreds of great tertöns have appeared, as well as over a thousand lesser ones.
On the sutra level, the kahma cycle contains teachings on pratimoksha and bodhichitta. On the tantra level, it contains teachings on the kriya, upa, and yoga tantras. Its principal contents, however, are the unsurpassable tantras, which, in the Nyingma system, are divided into three inner classes. As already indicated, the first class is the mahayoga (in other words, the tantra section), which includes the general tantra entitled The Phantasmagorical Net24 and so forth, as well as the various mandalas related to the particular tantras of the enlightened body, speech, mind, qualities, and activities. The second class is the anuyoga (that is, the section of esoteric teachings on the tantra), with the mandala of The United Assembly25 connected with the nine gradual vehicles. The third is the atiyoga (that is, the section of essential instructions). This is further divided into (a) the outer cycle on the mind, comprising eighteen tantras;26 (b) the inner cycle on the vast expanse, consisting of The Bridge of Diamond27 and other tantras; and (c) the secret cycle, which consists of the seventeen tantras28 and many other texts.
A study of the various Nyingma histories of the Dharma shows that the kahma teachings are the very foundation of the Nyingma tradition as it was previously propagated in Tibet, and demonstrates the greatness of its lineage holders. The tradition of the Phantasmagorical Net, in other words, the Guhyagarbha-tantra and so forth, and the exegesis and practical instructions for these teachings, have been preserved unspoiled until the present day by the majority of the Nyingma monasteries. These are the foundations of Dorje Drak and Mindroling in central Tibet, Kathog and Pelyul in lower Kham, and Shechen and Dzogchen in the middle region.
But in our day, armies of barbarians, fired by dreadful, evil intentions, have attacked and annihilated the teachings, the monasteries, and the sangha that upheld the doctrine in both central Tibet and Kham. Not even a single text was spared. This is the terrible calamity that has be-fallen us. Despite everything, however, and after all the fighting in Tibet, I worked very hard to bring to India all the books that belonged to me in Pemakö.
Now, Zhadeu Trulshik Rinpoche (who feels a great responsibility for the continuation and preservation of the teachings) often said to me that he wished to receive the explanation and transmission of the entire range of empowerments and transmissions of the kahma teachings. At the cost of great physical hardship, he recently journeyed here from Solu-Khumbu, bringing offerings, in order to repeat his request. Thus, even now, it is still possible to teach and propagate the empowerments and transmissions of the long oral lineage of kahma. It shows that, even in these days of great darkness, the lifeline and continuity of our teachings have not necessarily been severed. This is something we should be happy about.
Years ago, when I was twenty, I was at Mindroling monastery and received many empowerments, instructions, and transmissions belonging to this cycle of the kahma teachings, together with the sadhanas of the Eight Great Herukas, the Embodiment of Wisdom, and so forth. There were many lamas and tulkus receiving them at the same time, of whom the principal recipients were the two sons of the Mindroling lineage: Minling Khen Rinpoche Khyentse Norbu and Minling Chung Rinpoche Ngawang Chödrak.29 However, on numerous occasions, the great abbot and vajradhara said, addressing himself especially to me, “I am giving you all the empowerments, transmissions, and instructions of the most important kahma and terma teachings.30 It is now your task to uphold the doctrine of the Nyingmapas. You must keep and preserve the books of kahma and terma. You must expound and propagate them, and never miss an opportunity to do so.” Now, when I think about what he said, I see that his words were prophetic.
Also, when I was receiving The Precious Treasury of Termas31 from the Lord Phuktrul Rinpoche,32 he said to me jokingly, “Of all the disciples of the two Jamgöns, Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo33 and Jamgön Kongtrul Lodro Thaye,34 only I have given The Precious Treasury of Termas as many as five times. But you will give it ten times.” I remember wondering how on earth this could be true. But I can see now that he too was speaking with clairvoyant foresight, since even though I never planned to do so, I have in fact given it nine times.35
Well now, I, your old father, have no qualities at all, except one. My root teachers, learned and accomplished as they were, were Padmasambhava in person. I never did a single thing to disappoint them, nothing that they could regard as even mildly inappropriate, let alone anything that went against their wishes. That’s my main achievement: my samaya is undamaged. And I confess that with such a pure lineage, I do feel rather pleased with myself! It’s pretty unusual these days, isn’t it?
Of the two thousand or so people who are now receiving these empowerments and transmissions, there are thirty-seven tulkus and about sixty abbots, professors, and teachers. The majority are members of the monastic and tantric sanghas, practitioners of the Dharma. About a quarter of the assembly is made up of the laity, both men and women. In the past, it was not the custom to give the profound empowerments of the Secret Mantra openly to a large number of people. The only people to whom they were granted were those who would be certain to practice them and who would be able to keep the samaya.
It is said that the Vinaya should be adapted to the customs of the country in which it is being observed and I will act according to the same principle. Nowadays, even children are delighted to receive empowerments and nobody would be happy if they were turned away. Nevertheless, when people are asked whether they are able to practice or not, if they answer that they can when in fact they can’t, the samaya will be spoiled. This will be a downfall both for myself and for others. On the other hand, people with wrong views do not come to receive empowerments, even if they are invited. Consequently, I shall regard all those attending as faithful disciples and will bestow empowerment on them. It is generally said, for example in the Chandrapradipa-sutra, that the mind of each and every being is pervaded by the sugatagarbha. This being so, no one is an improper vessel for empowerment. All should be accepted in a spirit of bodhichitta. Of course, people without understanding are naturally cut off from these great skillful means, for they are “self-secret.” In view of this, I think that the fault of teaching the Secret Mantra to a large and indiscriminate crowd will not occur.
Regarding the empowerment itself, each and every word must be clearly understood, and what is to be visualized and meditated upon must be clearly present to the mind. If this is not the case, and there is no understanding of what is taking place, it is impossible to say that the mere touching of the head with the empowerment substances or tasting the water from the vase will result in the maturation of the mind. All the same, the root of the Secret Mantra is pure perception. If one has pure perception and devotion free from doubt, if one can consider the Lama as the true manifestation of the main deity in the mandala and look upon the empowerment substances as true amrita, blessed by him, it is said that the mere sight of the mandala of the Secret Mantra, or the mere hearing of the name of the yidam deity, will be a source of immeasurable benefits. In such cases, it is certain that the blessing of the empowerment is transmitted.
Once one has received an empowerment, it is essential to observe the samaya. This is like putting a snake inside a bamboo cane. The snake can go either up or down; there is no side exit in the middle. In other words, if you do not damage the samaya, you will go straight up to the buddhafields; if you damage it, you will go straight down to the hell realms. It is vital to appreciate the importance of observing the samaya and of putting the teachings into practice. You must do this for your own sake. And there are many different samayas to be observed, many teachings to be practiced. You must know how to observe them all, condensing them into a single essence.
There is no greater fault for Dharma practitioners than to practice the Dharma incorrectly. Motivation and practice should never be at cross-purposes. This is crucial. Don’t be hypocritical. It won’t do just to mouth formulas like “I take refuge, I take refuge” and “Nying je, nying je—beings are suffering. Oh, how sad!” while at the same time you neglect such things as faith, samaya, and the karmic law of cause and effect, running after your selfish aims in a completely two-faced way.
The authentic Buddhadharma is not something outside the mind. It dwells within. This is why Buddha has said:
Abandon every evil deed,
Practice virtue well,
Perfectly subdue your mind:
This is Buddha’s teaching.
If we condense this verse into a single point, it means that every action, whether great or small, that is motivated by the three poisons of craving, aversion, and ignorance, is negative. This is what we must strive to eliminate. If we completely give up harming others and eradicate the negative intentions that are the root of this, the pratimoksha vows will be perfectly observed. Again, all actions, big or small, that are not defiled by the three poisons are positive. This is what we must accomplish. If we are not stained by the three poisons, we will gradually acquire the altruistic attitude of wishing to benefit others. The whole of bodhichitta is complete in this altruistic attitude and the activities that bring benefit to others. It is through virtuous or nonvirtuous intentions that negative and positive actions are perpetrated. The source of all virtue and nonvirtue is thus the mind alone, and it is over our minds that we must mount an unceasing guard. All the eighty-four thousand teachings of the Buddhadharma were set forth for one reason only: to tame the mind. If we succeed in bringing our wild, rough minds to heel, all ordinary perceptions and clingings will naturally dissolve, and the “infinite purity” of all phenomena will become manifest.36 In this way, the samayas of the Secret Mantra are complete and perfect.
Subduing the mind leads naturally to the development of a good heart. This is what we are referring to when we use the beautiful word bodhichitta. Furthermore, the samayas of the Secret Mantra relate not to the actions of body and speech (which are the specific preserve of the Vinaya) but to the mind. And they can be damaged in a single instant. For example, as soon as you feel strong and genuine hatred toward one of the Dharma kindred, you have committed the third downfall of the Vajrayana.37 If you have genuine contempt for a non-Buddhist religion (to say nothing of other Buddhist tenet systems), you have committed the sixth downfall. You must repair your samaya as soon as it is damaged. The more you delay, the heavier the fault will be. Consequently, if you commit even a small infraction or allow the samaya to degenerate even slightly, do not dismiss it as unimportant but diligently confess it at once.
Once you have received the empowerment of any deity of the three roots, you are bound from then on to consider the yoga related to the body, speech, and mind of that deity as your essential meditation.38 This is your samaya. Of course, you may not be able to perform lots of meditations and recitations on all sorts of deities, but if you meditate on Vajrasattva, the sovereign of all mandalas, you will in fact be meditating on all of them. This meditation is praised as a way of purifying all breaches, downfalls, and negativities. It is very important to make an effort and recite the hundred-syllable mantra at least twenty-one times daily, within the framework of a confession practice. To sum up, if you are able to extract the essence of the empowerment you have received by maintaining a virtuous lifestyle and a good meditation practice, you yourself are the one who will benefit.
Here we all are. Despite the fact that no announcement was made that these empowerments were to take place, we have managed to come together, drawn by our past pure connections with the Dharma, our karma, and our aspirations. If we continue to pray and make the repeated aspiration to meet again in the buddhafields in our next lives, I am sure that this will happen.
I therefore request you all, masters and disciples, to have the utterly pure attitude of bodhichitta. Aspire constantly and pray without ceasing that this precious Buddhadharma, the source of every prosperity and joy, should prevail and spread. Pray that His Holiness the Dalai Lama, the head and crown jewel, the supreme protector of the snowy land, together with all the great holders of the doctrine, should live long and that their activities may constantly increase. Pray too that all the beings in the world, particularly of this noble land of India, and especially of Tibet, the Land of Snow, be swiftly freed from the suffering and torment inflicted in this decadent age, and that they be set before a feast of fresh and perfect happiness and prosperity.
Lamas and tulkus, there is just one last thing. I want to tell you of my great hope and expectation. I am an old man, and my health is not so good. In any case, it will be hard for me to continue to teach and spread the empowerments and transmissions of the kahma teachings to any great extent. But now I have been able to give them to you in their entirety, and this has made me very happy. You have inherited the riches of your forefathers, and you must not allow these profound instructions, which are like wish-fulfilling jewels, to decline. This is the great responsibility that you must feel.
All the scriptures of the Nyingma kahma were completely destroyed, except for this one set of mine. If one single folio is lost from it, the cycle in its entirety will be destroyed. So I request you, lamas and tulkus, to copy and publish these books as much as possible. Practice and accomplish them for your own sake and for the sake of others. Teach them. Propagate them, so that the stream of the teachings is not severed but remains forever. Give the greatest attention to upholding and preserving the teachings. This is of the utmost importance, and from my heart, I entreat you.
