Practicing the Teachings without Sectarian Bias
A Discourse on the Importance of Practicing with Trust and Devotion the Teachings to which One Feels Drawn39
I would like to say a few things to you, my vajra brothers and sisters, gathered here. We Tibetans are from a country where the Buddha’s teaching was deeply rooted. It may indeed be said that we were born in the buddhafield of the noble Avalokiteshvara, and we all understand, more or less, what is meant by Dharma. However, the factor that differentiates Buddhists from non-Buddhists is taking refuge in the Three Jewels of Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha. Those who take refuge are Buddhists; those who do not are non-Buddhists. Of the Three Jewels, the Buddha revealed the sunlight of the sacred teachings in the dark abyss of this world. He is our guide and benefactor, and indeed that of all living beings. He set forth inconceivable teachings of the supreme Dharma in order to lead us to the buddhafields and to liberation. The Dharma is our path. Those who uphold the Dharma by listening to it, teaching it, and practicing it are called the Sangha. These Three Jewels possess extraordinary qualities, and it is thanks to them that liberation from the suffering of samsara and the lower destinies, and the attainment of the everlasting joy of buddhahood, are possible. We must recognize what the Three Jewels are and take refuge in them.
We become Buddhists by taking refuge. Now, the root, the factor that brings us to take refuge, is faith, and this, therefore, is the very foundation of Dharma. At the outset, faith and devotion are what impel us to take refuge; they enable us to assimilate it and make it part of ourselves. If there is no faith, there is no refuge, and without refuge, we cannot absorb the blessings of the Three Jewels. Therefore, with sincere trust in the Three Jewels, and with confidence that they are our unfailing and constant guardians, we should seek their protection, relying on them totally. This is what taking refuge means. Our faith should be as solid and unwavering as a mountain, as unfathomable and boundless as the sea. It should be constant. If it is unstable and we have only the appearance of faith, if we “take refuge” only when everything is going well and we feel fine, it will be hard for the blessings of the Three Jewels to penetrate our being.
Taken as a whole, this world is a place where the doctrine of the Buddha Shakyamuni has appeared, together with the Secret Mantra teachings, the Vajrayana. Especially in the snowy land of Tibet, thanks to the compassion of all the buddhas and the cooperative merit of beings, the teachings of both the sutras and the tantras appeared together, like the sun rising in the sky. Since we are by temperament drawn to the Mahayana, we understand that there is not one of the infinite multitude of beings throughout the vast reaches of space that has not been our father or mother. And we acknowledge that at one moment or another, they have all taken great care of us, just like our parents in this present life. We therefore feel responsible for them all—these parents of ours—and when we recite even a single mani, we do it for their sake. When we perform even a single prostration, we do it for them. This is the attitude and motivation of the Mahayana.
We may understand that we have fallen into the mire of samsara and the lower realms. But if our wish is to gain liberation only for ourselves, if we lack this altruistic attitude of wanting to bring happiness to others, our orientation will be that of the Hinayana, not the Mahayana. Even if we take refuge wishing to gain liberation, our limited attitude will result only in the ability to traverse the paths of the shravakas and pratyekabuddhas.
Taking refuge and cultivating bodhichitta—the decision to attain enlightenment for the sake of all beings—are the preliminary groundwork for all practices. Whatever practice we do derives from the Buddha’s teaching, the union of the sutras and tantras. Thanks to our stock of merit, the Buddhadharma came to Tibet. Appearing first during the reign of the religious king Songtsen Gampo, it was definitively established at the time of the abbot Shantarakshita, the master Padmasambhava, and the religious king Trisong Detsen.40 And it has remained until the present day without degeneration or decline. As a result, and also because the Dharma contains a wealth of instructions suited to the various needs of beings, a whole range of doctrinal teaching appeared in our country. Because the texts were rendered from Sanskrit into Tibetan at different times, we speak of the old translations and the new translations. Within these two categories, there are many subschools, but they are all essentially the same. They are all the teachings of the Buddha. They are all the immaculate words of Buddha himself. Therefore all the different schools, whether they derive from the earlier or later periods of translation, such as the Nyingma, Kagyu, Sakya, or Gelug, are really different only in name. In their essence they are all a single doctrine: the word of the Buddha. This means that although we should follow the tradition to which we feel drawn, we should never presume to criticize other schools. If we train in our own tradition with faith and devotion, it is certain that we are following the unmistaken path of the Buddhadharma. If, by contrast, we practice with partiality and a sense of sectarian difference, believing that our own practice is the only right one, and if we denigrate the other teachings, we are committing a very serious fault. The Buddha said that only he and those on his level could be the judge of others. No one else. Therefore, since emanations of the buddhas and bodhisattvas are everywhere, do not criticize others. Instead, train in pure perception and practice the teachings to which you aspire.
Pursuing this same theme, we can say that a particularity of us Tibetans is that not one of us, not even a single child, is ignorant of the mani. There is not one of us who lacks faith in the Dharma. It would be unimaginable. Of course, we are now only refugees, but when we escaped, we had—and still have—the Three Jewels in our hearts. We did not leave them behind. We should practice with a one-pointed confidence in them, bringing all the multitude of Buddha’s teachings into a single essence. After all, it is impossible to practice all the teachings separately. Nobody can do that, or even knows how! So the question is how to condense all these teachings and practices into one. Lord Buddha has said: Abandon every evil deed, practice virtue well, perfectly subdue your mind. This is Buddha’s teaching.
What is evil? What is negativity? Evil is action that harms others. Moreover, it is said that not only should we refrain from harming others in the present, we should refrain from doing things to harm ourselves in the future (as the result of evil karma). Again, what is virtue? It is the good heart, the wish to benefit others. This is what we call bodhichitta. If we have a good heart, wishing the welfare of others, and if we bring benefit to others and to ourselves, we are practicing virtue. Virtue depends exclusively on a good heart. We may well recite the refuge prayer, but if we harbor evil thoughts, it is meaningless. As the saying goes, “With good motivation, all the grounds and paths are excellent. With evil motivation, all the grounds and paths are ruined.”41 A good motivation, a good heart—this is what we must have at all times. This is the Dharma and nothing else. It is not something grandiose or elaborate.
To illustrate this truth, there is a story about three men who all attained buddhahood thanks to a single clay tsatsa.42 One man made the tsatsa with great devotion and faith in the Three Jewels. Later, another man found it by the roadside. He reasoned that if it were left there unprotected, the rain would damage it. Since he had nothing better to cover it with, he took off his own boot and placed it over the tsatsa. A third man found the tsatsa thus covered, and was shocked, thinking that to put a shoe on a tsatsa was disrespectful and the wrong thing to do. He therefore removed the boot. Of course, it is not right to cover a tsatsa with a shoe, but since the intention of the second man was sincere and good, and since he had perfect confidence in the Three Jewels, his act was positive. All three men are said to have attained enlightenment.
The Buddha said that we should completely subdue our minds. Whatever we do, for good or ill, it is our mind that is the true agent. In the very depths of our being, we all desire one thing: we want to be happy. We don’t want to suffer. But because of this—this wanting—the three defilements of craving, aversion, and ignorance arise, and suffering is what we get. It is because of these defilements that we accumulate actions that prevent us from escaping from samsara. So it is important right from the start to see the difference between a good motivation and an evil one. Our own mindfulness should be our teacher. We must examine what is positive and what is negative with mindfulness. If positive thoughts arise, we should go along with them. If nonvirtuous thoughts arise, we should put a stop to them. A virtuous mind is the source of happiness. An unvirtuous mind is the source of pain. It’s as simple as that—as we can see from our own experience. When the Buddha spoke about the hell realms and the pretas, he wasn’t making it up. He was simply talking about how things are.43
Furthermore, all objects to which we show respect and make offerings are simply supports with which we practice Dharma.44 But the Dharma itself is in our own minds. It is not something outside. It depends entirely on our good or evil intentions. So it’s very important always to have a good heart. If we do, this itself means that we possess the Buddha’s teaching. If we practice virtue properly, if we reject evil, if we have confidence in the karmic law of cause and effect, and if we have real trust in the Three Jewels, we will never do anything to be ashamed of. It is important not to do things that we will regret in the future.
Because of the places where we live these days, we are constantly in contact with foreigners. Our young people are falling under their influence and are losing their faith. There is a risk that they will lose interest in the Dharma. We should think about this carefully and try to find ways that this can be avoided. Never give up the Three Jewels!
Guru Rinpoche prophesied the calamity that has be-fallen Tibet, and he also spoke of ways it could have been avoided. From the time of the fifth45 to the thirteenth46 Dalai Lamas, all the ceremonies needed to avert the disaster were performed properly. But when the thirteenth Dalai Lama passed away, the prophecies were put aside and neglected, and the ceremonies and rituals were not performed as they should have been. Because of this, the prediction was fulfilled, “Evil doctrines will spread, evil forces will arise within and the people’s minds will be possessed by demons.” If Guru Rinpoche had been able to perform the exorcism three times when he was in Tibet, binding the evil forces under oath, Buddhadharma would have remained for a very long time. But he was hindered by wicked ministers and could only perform the exorcism twice.47 This is why our country has sunk into the catastrophe that you know only too well.
And yet, in the midst of this terrible situation, there is at least one good thing: His Holiness the Dalai Lama. Outwardly, he is like an iron fence and inwardly like a precious treasure. He is our refuge in this and future lives, the guide of gods and men. He has been able to come and settle, without any danger to his life, in India, the noble land. To the eye of an impartial observer, it is thanks to this that an amazing development has taken place, both for the Dharma and in the political situation of us Tibetans. You all know this—you don’t need me to tell you. It has all happened thanks to His Holiness the Dalai Lama, and to him alone. We should be endlessly grateful to him and pray for his long life. This is vital.
But what does this imply? There is not one person among us who has not received teachings and empowerments from His Holiness. Since we are now linked with him in the Dharma, we must observe the samaya. If we go around devotedly saying, “Oh, Gyalwa Rinpoche, Gyalwa Rinpoche!”48 but behave in a way that contradicts this devotion, our conduct is absolutely wrong. We must act according to His Holiness’s wishes. Condensing our samayas into a single point, we must understand that we are all the disciples of the Buddha and all followers of the one teaching that is his. On this basis we should practice the tradition to which we are drawn. We must refrain from criticizing other traditions and schools, and stop entertaining wrong notions about them. We are in a foreign country; we should not make an exhibition of our bad behavior! Even if we are unable to have pure vision regarding each other, we should at the very least aim and aspire not to criticize and have wrong views about each other. Sometimes it appears we are completely at logger-heads! As soon as one problem is solved, another one arises. It’s quite uncanny! So do your best to avoid such things. Older people should advise the young, and we should all raise our spirits and aspirations. This is so important at the present time. And indeed, this is the best way to pray for the long life of His Holiness and perform a real service for the Dharma.
Whether we come from this region or from farther afield, we all want Tibet to be free. We are like people gasping with thirst. To that end, laity and religious must all be truly united. And this should not be mere lip service; we must really be united like water mixed with milk. If we succeed in this, I am convinced that thanks to bodhichitta, to the unflinching resolve of the teacher, the Three Jewels, and above all, His Holiness the Dalai Lama, Tibet will once again regain its freedom. But if we fight among ourselves and constantly create difficulties for each other, this is not only a disgrace but constitutes a real obstacle. So keep this in mind, all of you. I beg you to strive to make His Holiness’s wishes come true! This is my advice to you, the advice of an old man. It is indeed my testament.
