Present Fresh Wakefulness
A Meditation Manual on onconcepwal Wisdom 
CONTENTS
Preface 7 
INTRODUCTORY TEACHINGS 9 
A SPIRITUAL PERSON 21 
No SAMSARA APART FRoM THouGHTs 35 
DIVORCE 51 
THE LAMP THAT DISPELS IGNORANCE 67 
RELEASE 82 
MEANS AND KNowLEDGE 92 
SMALL FREEDOM 105 
RENUNCIATION u6 
DEVOTION AND PuRE PERCEPTION 
NoT MEDITATION BUT FAMILIARIZATION 148 
THE HEART OF THE PRACTICE 163 
A PERMANENT VACATION 179

PREFACE 
These teachings were compiled from two seminars given atKa Nying Shedrub Ling Monastery in 1997 and 1998, as well as at re treats at N agi Gompa in 1997 and Rangjung Y eshe Gomde, USA, in 1998. Rinpoche seemed tremendously inspired during all these times, and offered those of us in attendance the pithy meditation instructions that form the basis for this wonderful manual. In some instances, Rinpoche's teaching style fell into a rhythm that resembles spontaneous poetry. We have set these instances in verse form, to capture the rhythm and cadence of his speech, and to highlight their profundity. This body of teachings both sprang from and generated a special atmosphere that we felt compelled to share.
Many thanks go to everyone involved in this project, the tran scriber, Joanne Larson, our editor, Kerry Moran and the proofread ers Ian Saude and Daniel Kaufer.
May this work extend the life of the precious master Chokyi Nyima Rinpoche and may it hasten the awakening and training in present, fresh wakefulness in countless beings.
Erik & Marcia Schmidt
Leggett, USA
Rangjung Yeshe Gomde
 

INTRODUCTORY TEACHINGS
THE GREAT YOGI MILAREPA said, "This life is mere illusion, a mere dream. Be compassionate towards beings who don't un derstand this." All our various experiences and dreams are simply the magical display of our thoughts. Until our thoughts are cleared away and dissolve, karma and disturbing emotions will not end. It is impor tant to understand that thoughts themselves are karma and disturb ing emotions.
Life is like a magical illusion or a dream. Because we are asleep, unaware, we dream up all types of different episodes, involving vari ous degrees of pleasure and pain. In this sleep, everything feels as if it were real. The moment we wake up, however, it is obvious that all those experiences have no real existence. Yet, within the dream, they felt the same as our daytime experiences. The anxieties, the fear, the worry we entertained in the dream are all completely unreal, but while dreaming, we do not know them to be a dream, to be illusions. Only after we awake do we realize, "Wow, it was a dream - only a dream." We can even laugh at ourselves for being so overtaken! If it was disturbing, we are happy to wake up, while we feel a sense of loss upon awakening from a pleasant dream.
I'm using the example of a dream as a metaphor for our waking reality. 
All things, all of our ordinary experiences, are like dreams, they are as essentially insubstantial as the moon reflected in water. 
Though from time to time we have a hunch that this might be true, only after we have spent some time learning, reflecting and medi tating do we fully understand that our life experiences are like a dream.
Three kinds of knowledge are necessary to ascertain the nature of things - the basic situation, you could say. First is the knowledge resulting from learning. When we examine, analyze and inspect what we learn, we are able to gain the second type of knowledge, resulting from reflection. Finally, we achieve the third type of knowledge by making what we've learned part of our own experience through practice. Through these three types of knowledge, we are able to completely end the cause of confusion.
Everything that we see, everything that we experience, appears due to a combination of factors. Nothing has any independent or true existence. Everything is 'groundless and roodess', yet appears due to dependent origination. While this is definitely true, a buddha does not explain this immediately. Being wise, compassionate and extremely ingenious, a buddha teaches in a manner that is practical for people to understand, which means he teaches in a gradual way. Very few of us are able to grasp the nature of things instantaneously. Therefore, Buddha Shakyamuni turned the Wheel of the Dharma in three consecutive ways. The first set of teachings focused on the Four Noble Truths, and the second set concentrated on the Absence of Char acteristics - a synonym for emptiness. His third Dharma Wheel fully reveals the nature of things, and is therefore known as the Total Uncovering. The first set of teachings is clear, the second very clear and the third extremely clear!
Simply put, the Buddha's message in the first turning of the Wheel of Dharma is that anyone with a dualistic frame of mind suffers. The dualistic mind entertains selfish emotions, creates karma, has worries, hope, fear and pain. Dualistic mind seems to have built-in suffering. There is an immense variety of suffering, but all of these can be included within three types: the suffering of change, the double suffering of unpleasantness piled on unpleasant ness, and the all-pervasive suffering of being conditioned. This is not a matter of mere philosophy; it is very real. We can and do ex perience suffering, discomfort, distress, and worry throughout our lives. Dualistic mind is always ready to be upset, to feel uneasy. An input from the senses, a memory or anticipation that is either a little pleasant or a little unpleasant always has the power to disturb us. In addition, there is one suffering which we can never ultimately side step: death.
Suffering does not mean that life is continuously painful or that everything is unpleasant. It does mean that happiness or pleasure does not last, it is not forever, and it is never perfect. Even when things seem to be wonderful and we have achieved what we want, we still worry, thinking, "Is it going to run out? Is it going to get a dent? Am I going to lose it?" Pleasure mixed with apprehension is rendered imperfect. "Am I going to lose this happy feeling?" "Is there a greater happiness I could get instead?" Worry spoils the pleasure.
The three types of suffering are not difficult to understand. There is the suffering of change. Double suffering is simply the fact that suffering is already unpleasant, and that this unpleasantness can eas ily become compounded. Things can get worse. The third type is the suffering of being conditioned, which is both more subde and more all-pervasive than the simple ability to be hurt. For example, if a thorn pierces our skin, we immediately have pain. While in this physical body, it does not take much to hurt. In fact, it takes very little. Even a bad smell can be enough to upset our sense of equilib rium. If it's a particularly nice smell, our minds also become a little disturbed. It seems that fickleness is a quality that's built into our present, dualistic state - even more so than the fickleness of a small child.
We can certainly all agree that there is suffering. This is the first point, to acknowledge that there is suffering. The second point is to understand that it is not uncaused, there is a reason. The reason we suffer is due to karmic actions and selfish emotions. Karma and emotions have one driving force - the belief in ego. Clearly, there is only one way to solve this dilemma: to realize egolessness. In a nutshell, then, the realization of egolessness is the quintessence of the Buddha's first turning of the Wheel of Dharma.
The notion of"Me" or "I" is held so strongly that it's taken as an absolute given- yet it is mistaken. To reverse this misconception of an existing "I," we need to investigate and come to the conclusion that there is no real ego. After that, we need to train in remaining in the state of equanimity where no notion of self is held in mind, the state of egolessness. This solves the entire problem. It is like cutting a tree at its root: all the branches, twigs and leaves wither at the same time. To have dissolved ego-clinging and to be stable in the knowledge that realizes egolessness is simply another description of freedom, liberation, great peace. This is extremely profound, and it is real.
In the second turning of the Wheel of Dharma, the Buddha went deeper. He taught that not just ego, but all phenomena; are empty and devoid of true existence. The Prajiiaparamita scripture tided the Sutra on Transcendent Knowledge in Eight Thousand Verses teaches that perspective with extreme clarity. The Buddha taught on emptiness in incredible detail, and it may be difficult for one person to fathom all of his sutras and their commentaries. We may not have either the intelligence or the diligence that it takes to study all his words. Based on this, great masters of the past in India composed treatises condensing the vital points of the Buddha's teachings into small scriptures of sometimes only a few pages.
Some of these condensations of the intent of the Buddha's sec ond turning of the Wheel of Dharma are found in Nagarjuna's Middle Way treatises on reasoning. 
The Middle Way declares that everything from the aggregate of form up until the state of omnis cient enlightenment, is empty and unconstructed. The practical ap plication of this settles our mind in a state that is empty and free of preconceived thought-constructs, and lets us proceed through the path to enlightenment.
This path is composed of two factors: knowledge and means. The supreme knowledge is the knowledge of profound emptiness, which is the sixth of the six paramitas - transcendent knowledge. The most eminent method is described by the first five paramitas - generosity, discipline, patience, perseverance and concentration - embraced by the profound emptiness of the sixth. This unity of means and knowledge is the very heart or quintessence of the second Dharma Wheel, the intermediate set of teachings on the absence of characteristics.
During the third turning of the Wheel of Dharma, the Buddha explained in a way that is even more clear. Not only is everything from the aggregate of forms to omniscient enlightenment unreal, empty and devoid of mental constructs; in addition, everything is luminosity.
This third set of teachings is meant for people who are more in telligent and bold. When first hearing a term like luminosity, a stu dent might think, "What the heck does that mean? It sounds secret!" At first glance, it seems the second set of teachings is easier to un derstand than the third, just as the first is easier than the second. While it's not entirely incomprehensible that all phenomena are empty, from the aggregate of form up to the state of omniscience, the first turning is easier or simpler to understand. Ego is the creator of suffering; the enlightened mind is egoless. This is logical, and un derstanding this is very beneficial.
The third turning of the Wheel of Dharma, the final set of teachings, is the intent of the tantric teachings. Tantras are de scribed as being of different classes or types: father tantras, mother tantras, and nondual tantras. Vajrayana is also known as the vajra vehicle of Secret Mantra, the vehicle that uses the fruition as the path. One practices Vajrayana firmly based on the foundation of the two first Dharma Wheels, and not as a separate practice.
Vajrayana practice is based first of all on acknowledging suffer ing. We must be fed up with suffering in order to seek liberation by realizing egolessness. On a deeper level, we experience that every thing from the aggregate of form to omniscient enlightenment is empty, unconstructed and insubstantial. Now, in Vajrayana, we ad ditionally realize that everything has a luminous nature. This may be hard to understand, especially if one's understanding is merely in tellectual, if one only studies the teachings and does not practice. During the ages, a lot of debate and dispute has arisen over exacdy this point.
The tantric perspective is described as emptiness endowed with the supreme of ali aspects, unchanging great bliss and original wakefulness that encompasses samsaric existence as well as nirvanic peace. This is the intent of the third turning of the Wheel of Dharma. This original wakefulness that encompasses all of samsara and nirvana: where is it right now? Where is this unchanging great bliss; where is this nature; where is the emptiness endowed with the supreme of all as pects? All these terms refer to something that is intrinsic to our mind, something that is present right now at this very moment. It is not to be found outside in the earth, in the water, in the wind, in the fire or in physical space. At this very moment, right now, we have some sense of knowing, of experiencing, don't we? This is mind. Mind is this knowing. Though there seems to be a knower, when we look, we do not find it. It is unfindable, like empty space. Physical space is defined as that which accommodates. The word spacious itself means open and accommodating.
When something is concrete, a physical form, we feel it earns the right to have a name and we attach a name to it. When something is inconcrete, not composed of physical matter in any way whatsoever, just wide open; we also give it a name. In the first example, it is because there is something that we can give it a name. In the second instance, it is because there is no thing, nothing, that we name it as well. This second case involves something that is not and yet func tions; something that can both be identified and yet cannot. Exactly how do we identify space? It is not something to see, to hear, smell or taste, not something touch. It is not earth, water, fire or wind. Yet it does function in that it accommodates everything else. That is the identification of space. Thus, if you want to identify space in a positive sense, in terms of it being such and such, you can do that. And if you want to identify it in a negative sense, in terms of it not being such and such, you can also do that. It's exactly the same with identifying the knower, mind, thinking: it can be identified, if you want, to be such and such. Or it can be totally unidentifiable if that is what you want. It's merely a matter of perspective. 
To go back to the tantric perspective: this "emptiness endowed with the supreme of all aspects, this unchanging great bliss, this original wakefulness encompassing all of samsara and nirvana," is contained within the nature of our mind. Because our nature in cludes such qualities, it is called the buddha nature, literally, the essence of the sugatas. We do not have to rely only on assumptions to directly prove to ourselves that we possess a buddha nature. When you see smoke, you can infer there is fire below from which the smoke arises. In the same way, any person, no matter how wicked he or she might be, still has some object of love, of affection. That is a sign that in that person there is love, from time to time. Also, any kind of person, no matter how stupid, still has some wisdom, an ability to discern what is useful, what is harmful, and then to choose. Even if the individual is very selfish, there is still some intelligence. Everyone has an ability to do something. In other words, these qualities are intrinsic to everyone; they are intrinsic to the human mind. They may be very limited, they may be hampered, but we all have these qualities of caring, of knowing, and of being capable.
Moreover, we have the ability to acknowledge that our mind is insubstantial. The knowledge of emptiness is at hand. When weal low our minds to be undisturbed for a little while, not caught up in likes and dislikes, we experience some sense of well-being, an easi ness that is carefree. It may not be the unchanging great bliss at this point, but it is present in every one of us. The emptiness in our per sonal experience may not be the fully-fledged emptiness endowed with the supreme of all aspects. The original wakefulness encompass ing all of samsara and nilvana is not yet fully perfected. It's as if these qualities are enveloped in something; they are hindered from being manifest. In the Buddhist teachings, that hindrance is called obscuration. Therefore, our nature can be described at this point as obscured suchness.
A sentient being is obscured suchness. A buddha is unobscured suchness. That which obscures the suchness are emotional and cog nitive obscurations. That which removes emotional obscuration is the six paramitas, loving kindness, being compassionate. In particu lar, the true view of emptiness thoroughly removes emotional ob scuration. Cognitive obscuration, on the other hand, is much more difficult to dissolve, to be free of and to utterly abandon. Only pre sent, fresh wakefulness - the original wakefulness that does not conceive of anything, that does not hold onto the three spheres of subject, object and action - can totally dissolve cognitive obscura tion. Cognitive obscuration means to conceptualize these three fac tors. That which can dispel it is the original wakefulness that does not conceptualize these three spheres.
When the two obscurations are purified, the twofold knowledges unfold. These twofold knowledges are already present within us. They are the knowledge of knowing the nature as it is - the reali zation of it as being empty, unconstructed, and insubstantial - and the knowledge of perceiving all possibly existing things. The perfec tion of the twofold knowledge reveals the two kayas. The two kayas are dharmakaya and rupakaya. Dharmakaya is unconstructed, while rupakaya, the form body, includes both sambhogakaya and nirma nakaya.
When the knowledge that realizes egolessness, the realization of the unconstructed and empty quality of all phenomena, is recog nized, trained in and stabilized, one is called a buddha. The word buddha in Tibetan is sang gye. Sang means purified, and gye per fected. A buddha has purified the two obscurations as well as the habitual tendencies for them and has perfected the twofold knowl edges. Such a being has established certainty of the natural state and vanquished all delusion. All confusion, disturbing emotions and karmas are obliterated. Unless the intent of the third turning of the Wheel of Dharma, the luminous nature, emptiness or original wake fulness is fully realized, that accomplishment is not considered true and complete enlightenment. Without that, the complete qualities of the awakened state are not manifest. These complete qualities include the twofold knowledges.
To reiterate, the twofold knowledges are the knowledge of knowing the nature of reality as it is - the realization of it as being empty, unconstructed, and insubstantial - and the knowledge of perceiving all possibly existing things. A buddha can, in a single instant, simultaneously perceive the manner in which all phenomena seemingly appear through dependent origination. A buddha simul taneously sees how phenomena are perceived by sentient beings as being real, how this mistakenness occurs, when it occurs, when it occurred, when it will be dissolved in the future, and what the causes and consequences of everything are. All of that can be perceived in a single instant. That is called the knowledge of perceiving all possibly existing things.
The basis of delusion is ego-clinging, to hold on to the idea of I. Delu sion is grounded in a lack of understanding of how the nature of all things is empty and insubstantial. The basis for delusion is also to fail to recognize the luminous nature of things. By realizing the nonexistence of a self and releasing the tight grip of ego, we will naturally and automatically understand that all other things are empty and devoid of identity. In this way, the intermediate set of teachings is more profound than the first. It is not just the mind that is insubstantial; everything else as well is naturally empty. Not knowing that everything is naturally empty is ignorance and confusion. Similarly, compared to the second set of teachings, the per spective of the third set is more profound. Not only is everything empty and unconstructed: it all is a state of purity totally endowed with immense qualities.
When hearing what the Buddha says about how things are, we as individuals can understand something. We do get a feeling that, "Oh yes, it is like this." We have some confidence. The Dharma and especially the pith instructions address exactly what is wrong and how to change it. They hit home.
We may study Buddhism. We may think about it and reflect. But, most essentially, we need to practice, to train in the great meditation of nonmeditation, as soon as possible. Do not think, "I will practice later." That attitude makes it never: our time simply runs out. Time will not wait for us. The ultimate practice is undistracted nonmeditation, which obliterates the root of confusion. It totally and permanently obliterates all karma, disturbing emotions and habitual tendencies.
To begin with, we need some method, some techniques to lead us to the ultimate. The best method is of course effortlessness, but effortlessness cannot be taught, or chased. Even if we try - espe cially if we try - we can't become automatically effortless. Effort lessness just does not seem to spontaneously take place. Still, it is a fact that confused experience falls apart the moment we simply let be in a nondualistic state. Right now, for most of us, every moment of ordinary experience is governed by conditioning. Our present habit is dominated by a deliberate effort. We have therefore no choice but to use our present habit of deliberate effort to arrive at effortlessness. Once we are accustomed to effortful meditation, we can make the leap to the effortless state.
In this book, I will unfold the various ways to arrive at noncon ceptual, present, fresh wakefulness, beginning with conceptual prac tices. I'll cover some of the topics quite cursorily, so it is best if you gain familiarity with my other books, if you have not read them. The Union of Mahamudra and Dzogchen and Indisputahle Truth contain many detailed teachings. For that reason, I do not feel the need to repeat here in this book what I have previously said.
A SPIRITUAL PERSON
IN OUR LIFE, THE GREATEST GOOD we can do is tO work for the welfare of infinite sentient beings. Therefore, generate this noble attitude: "I will study the Dharma and apply it in practice to establish all sentient beings in the supreme state of irrevemble and un surpassable enlightenment. To do so, I will learn, reflect and practice meditation." 
Beings are coundess, and they all suffer in innumerable ways. All their anguish is created by their negative karma and disturbing emo tions. As long as beings continue to make negative karma by acting out their disturbing emotions, permanent happiness is unattainable. Permanent happiness is only possible once dualistic fixation and the habitual tendencies for that are brought to an end. The only way to completely end dualistic fixation and habitual tendencies is by the practice of the sacred Dharma.
It's as if we are suffering from a disease for which the Dharma teachings are the remedy, with the teacher serving as the doctor. By applying the teachings in practice, we are following the cure which will allow us to get well. Every one of us in the six classes of beings undergoes a tremendous amount of pain and misery in terms of the deluded experience created by our own disturbing emotions and negative karma. We need to clear this up; we need to recover from this disease. Otherwise, samsara will go on endlessly. Out of ignorance, we wallow in selfish emotions that cause us to hurt and harm others, over and over again. This is our sickness. Rather than re maining infected, we need to find an antidote.
The medicine for this disease of selfishness is the sacred Dharma, which is true and unfailing, undeceiving. On a coarse level, you could say that any knowledge is Dharma. But Dharma in this con text is the knowledge that acts as a remedy towards selfish emotions. Dharma is the perfect information, if you will, that counteracts clinging to the idea of a self and all of its accompanying disturbing emotions.
Honestly, the sacred Dharma is simply how things are - the reality of what is, when we are unconfused. The very definition of Dharma is 'the unmistaken', that which is not confused. The way to be unmistaken is by first learning, next reflecting and then training in being unconfused. Through this training, we can completely and totally clear up deluded experience.
The teacher of the sacred Dharma, among the thousand buddhas who will appear in this aeon, is the fourth one, Buddha Shakyamuni. Other buddhas in the past have taught the sacred Dharma, and in the future, countless other buddhas will teach. From their undeluded state, buddhas give teachings that are in exact accordance with how things are.
The Buddha is described as being like a loving relative of you and all sentient beings; a relative that we may not even know. For a bud dha it makes no difference whether other beings like him or not or are respectful or not. Within the awakened state is a love that en compasses all other beings without any prejudice whatsoever. A buddha's qualities are inconceivable, and cannot be fathomed by or dinary thought. His activity represents the awakened state, the bud dha's mind. His speech is the teachings, endowed with the supreme qualities of abandonment and realization. Among the different miracles that a buddha can perform, the greatest miracle is that of the teachings, which have the ability to dissolve deluded experience and bring karma and disturbing emotions to a complete end. The sacred Dharma can grow in us and manifest the eminent qualities of loving kindness, compassion and insight. Equally amazing, also a miracle, we have the ability to receive these teachings still, to this very day.
To sum up, it is through the teachings of an enlightened buddha that all faults can be eradicated and all good qualities can be made manifest. There is actually nothing superior to that which we need; nothing better that we could possibly achieve. The greatest miracle the sacred Dharma can perform is to bring selfish emotions to a complete and permanent halt, and to make deluded experience dissolve or subside. That is the capacity of the sacred Dharma. 
I mentioned earlier that until our thoughts dissolve and are cleared up, karma and disturbing emotions will not end. Being angry, attached or dull are negative thoughts that create a great deal of suffering and trouble for us. We make the bad habits of being ag gressive, attached, stupid or close-minded into our 'second nature,' so to speak. When these tendencies have become ingrown, they per petuate themselves in life after life. It is these intensified thought states that create the fuel for future rebirths. They produce the very states of sentient beings who inhabit the hells, as well as the hungry ghost and animal realms. Therefore, in order to benefit both our immediate situation and our lasting welfare, we should do some thing about changing our states of mind from being angry, attached or close-minded.
You might be laughing now, because maybe you are the type of person who doesn't believe that there is a life after this. Simply look at how human beings are right now. Some people make being ag gressive, selfish and unpleasant towards others into a strong habit. They are not nice to be with - in fact, they are not even that happy to be with themselves! Other individuals try to be kind, unselfish and helpful towards others. They are nice to be with. In this way, we can see that whoever has the habit of being involved in selfish emotions is unpleasant for themselves as well as others. Isn't that obvi ous? 
Isn't it also possible that someone starts out being a kind-hearted and loving person, but then gets into bad company? Through the influence of others, they develop nasty traits. They become evil, and do things that are hurtful and harmful towards others. Haven't you seen that happen? 
Conversely, we also find people who start out being selfish and uptight about their own welfare, conceited, attached and very un pleasant. They hurt others through their words and actions. But they also can be influenced by the knowledge gained through study, re flection and meditation. They can change their ways and become relaxed and peaceful when they speak. They become gende, kind and helpful to others.
Either way, the point is that we can grow used to being a certain way. And it is definitely easier to be selfish than to be kind. We do not really have to study to be selfish! To be nice, to be gende, helpful and kind, is something that a person must learn and train in. Someone who gives in to common thought patterns of attachment, ag gression and dullness is called an ordinary person. But someone who gains understanding through learning, through reflection and through meditation starts to change their way of being. He or she speaks and acts in a way that becomes more relaxed, softer, more considerate. Such a person is called a practitioner, a spiritual person.
On a more advanced level, someone for whom all selfish emo tions have totally subsided and dissolved is called a buddha. But being a buddha is not just a matter of being purified of these selfish emotions. Accompanying this absence of self-absorption is a won derful presence that is the sublime knowledge of knowing the nature of things as it is, as well as the knowledge that perceives all possibly existing things. Thus, the definition of a buddha is to be both puri fied and perfected. As human beings, we set aims and goals for our lives and we try to pursue them. A businessman tries to earn profits and make money. A soldier tries to win battles. A scientist tries to unravel the mysteries of the universe or the uniqueness of a particu lar field of knowledge. In Buddhism, the aim that we try to achieve is to be a purified and perfected person, a buddha. The attainment, in short, is buddhahood. But this attainment is not reached through our own striving alone. It does not happen by pushing, by being smart and trying to figure out everything that is possibly knowable. Buddhahood is the state free from the web of conceptual thought. All other kinds of understanding or discoveries, all other kinds of intel ligence, are within the web of conceptual thought. The innate nature that is beyond conceptual thought, beyond the web of thinking, is not understood through thinking. In short, the state of enlightenment is thought-free wakefulness.
Thought-free wakefulness is not discovered or realized through thought. The understanding we gain through study and reflection is not enough to realize this ultimate state; we need different methods. We need to realize the twofold wisdom free from the two obscurations, which is called buddhahood. This buddhahood is realized through the combination oflearning, reflection and meditation. We do not realize enlightenment only through the use of sharp intelli gence. It is not enough to only have understanding through learning and reflection. However, based on that understanding, we can ac quire the knowledge resulting from meditation. That is the way to enlightenment.
The state of enlightenment that is free from the two obscurations and endowed with the twofold knowledge is, on one hand, difficult and far away. For example, it does not seem likely that an animal can easily get enlightened. According to the Buddha, there are also hell beings, hungry ghosts, jealous gods and gods. We do not see those beings, so therefore we may decide that they do not exist.
Some human beings suffer tremendously in their life. They may be as dull as animals or as aggressive as hell beings. It is very difficult for such people to pay attention to being free from the two obscurations. They simply don't seem to have the opportunity to do so. Even among more fortunate human beings, very few are interested in being free from the two obscurations and realizing the twofold knowledge. Compared to other sentient beings, a human being has the best chance of becoming a buddha. Human beings are in fact the closest to being a buddha, because they are suited to learning, reflection, and meditation. They are fundamentally capable - yet very few are interested.
For those few who want to apply themselves, to understand, re flect and practice meditation, there are still many hindrances. There are so many reasons for why we believe we have no time! Our big gest preoccupations are known as distraction, self-discouragement and laziness. We do not say that; we do not admit this to ourselves, of course. Instead, we say "I have work to do. That is why I have no time. I have family, I have parents and children I need to take care of. That is why I am busy." It is true that our responsibilities make us busy, but not that busy! The reason we are so busy is that we constandy occupy our attention, with what we see, hear, smell and taste and so forth - with what we think of. That makes us busy. Or perhaps we are just lazy or telling ourselves that we cannot practice.
Being a buddha seems very far away for most beings. As humans, our preoccupation with being busy creates immense hardship for ourselves. Honesdy, though, it is not that difficult to become en lightened if we really apply ourselves to practice.
Right now, we have that precious opportunity of being a human. We already have an enlightened essence, a buddha nature. We can meet or maybe even have met already with spiritual teachers; we can receive the instructions. The only thing that is left is to apply them. When we apply the instructions and practice, it is not that difficult - the only thing that is left is to be a buddha!
It is like cooking. Cooking is difficult. You need to arrange many things. Especially if you want to eat good dishes, like French food, you need to have many special and valuable ingredients. The actual cooking process also takes a long time. Even the skilled cook needs to apply effort; it is not easy. But finally, when the food is cooked and served, there is only one thing left - to eat. If no one eats the food, your effort is useless. The food is not for show; it is for eating. When we eat, the effort of having cooked becomes useful. Similarly, when we hear teachings, when we learn about practice, all we really need to do is practice. Having learned and reflected, our real job is to apply the teachings in practice. To learn, to reflect, to practice meditation, to become enlightened is not that difficult. We merely need to apply ourselves.
I would like to mention one more troublesome point here. We humans are very busy, so we tend to think that spiritual practice is sort of a side job. It is not a main pursuit; it is more like a hobby, but not even a true hobby. I know some Westerners whose hobby is not a small thing. They take their hobbies very seriously. Take the example of playing golfl Some play golf for money and fame; some play golf for fun. They play golf from morning to night. This is not a hobby; that is like work. In the morning they wake up, eat break fast and play golf. Mter lunch, they play golf. All they do is sleep, eat and golf. They put so much effort into this. If we practitioners were to put that much effort into practice each year, we would be come liberated very quickly. Unfortunately for practice, not many people apply as much diligence as dedicated golfers.
From the time you wake up in the morning until you fall asleep at night apply yourself at every moment with great care, with great mind fulness. Make sure that every time there is the impetus to be selfish or carried away by disturbing emotions, that you instead do some thing to change that. Apply some method, no matter what that method is. Just do whatever helps. If it helps to intellectually study the teachings and think about them, then do that. If it helps to bow down or make offerings and be formally nice in different ways, do that. If it helps to do the practices that purify obscurations and gather the accumulations, then do that. Do development stage, recitation and completion stage and so forth. Whatever the level of training we've learned to reduce our selfishness, our disturbing emotions, our stupidity, we should use those practices all the time, from morning to evening. Someone who does that is truly a practitioner and for such a person it is not that difficult to progress to enlightenment.
To the same degree that our selfish emotions diminish, the qualities of realization spontaneously grow. It is similar to the sun light increasing as the dark clouds vanish. The brilliance of the sun is unchanging. It only seems to decrease or increase due to the pres ence or absence of clouds. In the same way, the nature of mind - the very identity of that which thinks and feels all these thoughts and emotions - is unchanging, just like the sun. In our basic na ture, the qualities of enlightenment are primordially and perfectly present. But at the same time, although our nature is originally per fect, the cloud covers of the two obscurations prevent these qualities from being manifest. In our case, the two obscurations have not yet been purified, but they can be purified. Like the clouds, the obscu rations are temporary; they can disappear. If the clouds were in separable from the sun, it would be impossible to ever have a clear sky. But the clouds are not an intrinsic component of sunshine. Because they are temporary, they can vanish.
We should apply this example of the sky with clouds to our own situation. This is one of the special qualities of the Buddhist per spective. In essence, every sentient being is actually a buddha. Every sentient being has the potential for being a buddha. Every sentient being has a -basic nature that is completely enlightened. That is because the identity of that which thinks is already a state of thought-free wakefulness.
The thinking, the clinging to duality, is like a layer of clouds, covering the thought-free wakefulness, which is like the shining sun. To experience the pure sunshine of our true nature, we need to be free of all the different kinds of karmic, emotional, and habitual obscurations that cover it. The heart of the matter is simply this: we need to be free of our thinking.
It is our thinking that obscures our nature. Our thinking makes all the disturbing emotions. In fact, all of samsara, all disturbing emotions and karma, unfolds from our thinking. Do you remember the definition of a buddha as one who is both purified and perfected? 'Purified' means our thoughts are purified or dissolved. 'Per fected' means that the knowledge of knowing the nature as it is, and of perceiving all possibly existing things, is perfected. In order to realize this state of purified perfection, we need an understanding of how to train in meditation that is based on learning and reflection. 
All the different meditative methods can be condensed into three types: stillness, insight and loving compassion. These three types of practice can be applied to overcome any kind of selfish emotion. The most eminent way to overcome this nasty frame of mind, the selfish attitude of being attached, angry, dull, conceited, and jealous, is the knowledge of emptiness. Shamatha practice prepares for realization of emptiness. Shamatha, training in being quiet, practice is simply a technique against our selfish emotions and thoughts, this constantly busy, restless attitude. It is an easy method to apply to reduce the unpleasant manifestations of our nasty mind. Shamatha practice re duces this selfish attitude. When our mind is quiet, the selfish atti tude is not evident, not visible. However, that is not enough. Merely being quiet does not uproot ·selfishness, it does not cut it from the very root. What else is necessary? It is clear insight, vipashyana. If insight is indeed an essential element, you might wonder why the Buddha didn't teach that from the very beginning? "Why not teach the best from the beginning," you might think- "Why wait?." The simple reason is that our mind has a very strong habit of getting in volved in thoughts and feelings towards or against different things. To immediately teach the opposite of that, clear insight, is not so easy to either understand or to adopt. For this reason, the Buddha first taught us how to relax, how to calm down our minds.
In order to solve an intense argument with someone else, isn't it better to first calm down and then talk it over? Westerners say, "Leave me alone!" Isn't this one way of calming your mind? When your mind becomes calm, you can negotiate much more easily. When you are hot-tempered, it is difficult to discuss. In a sense, then, we could say that saying 'Leave me alone!' is a form of shamatha practice.
When we allow ourselves to simply be at peace as in shamatha practice, our strong emotions calm down until eventually they are not visible and may seem to not be present at all. There are many different methods traditionally taught for training in being at calm and at peace. Some involve holding an object in mind, while others involve holding nothing at all in mind. Of course, it would be better to remain calm without directing your attention towards something in particular - to be able to rest in a totally undirected state of attention. But if that is not easy, it helps to first begin with directing your attention towards a particular focus and to grow used to that. Eventually you can practice suspending this point of attention alto gether.
Focusing your attention is a way of remaining undistracted. You use the focus as a support; you keep your attention on something in order to not drift off and think of all sorts of different things. The object of meditation does not need to be particularly fancy or ornate. It could be a pebble or stone. Or you can use the movement of breath, the inhalation and exhalation. While you train in this way, at some point you will discover that you've wandered off and are thinking about something else. Once you notice that, immediately direct your attention back to the object. That is the training.
People differ: different individuals have different kinds of na tures. For some it is more practical to focus on a solid stone or peb ble, while for others it's better to use the movement of the breath, to simply follow the breathing. Traditionally, most people benefit from using the breathing as an object of meditation. The reason is that we always breathe; we have to, naturally. The notion 'breathing' is something neutral; it is a neutral concept. You do not have to rejoice that you are breathing. You do not have to be depressed about it. The only thing that is necessary to do here is to pay attention, because the breathing happens by itself. You do not have to breathe deliberately. You simply notice that the breath is being inhaled. You can feel it coming in through the nose. You do not hold the breath in continuously or forever - you have to breathe out again, you need to exhale. Again, you notice that also. Breathing is not something you have to do or regulate in any fashion; you simply pay at tention to it. When you can keep your attention on the movement of breath for a long time without starting to think about all sorts of other things, there is some sense of calm that accompanies that. This is called the attainment of shamatha.
The person who grows increasingly accustomed to this practice will notice a change in character. You can say that he or she has calmed down. The effect of this practice shows itself in all the other moments in life. You can see that the person has settled and has become gentler and more relaxed. Shamatha practice has a lot of bene fit. By calming down, you become much less involved in selfish emotions.
You start here by directing your attention to the movement of your breath. Chant refuge and bodhichitta - that is the excellent preparation for any practice, regardless of which one we are doing. Now we come to the main part, which is shamatha. Shamatha prac tice means simply being at ease, very physically and mentally relaxed. Don't get involved in thoughts of past or future. Simply pay atten tion to the movement of breath, and nothing else, with a sense of thought-free wakefulness.
When you have trained like this for a while and are relaxed and peaceful, your mind is still directed towards something- it's still focused on the object of attention. The next step is to let go of that and rest in undirected attention; to move from focused shamatha to shamatha free of support.
These two words, shamatha and vipashyana, are used in all three vehicles. The same words refer to slightly different meanings. The type of vipashyana taught in the general teachings in Buddhism is, from the perspective of the higher vehicles, actually a subtle form of shamatha. For example, in terms of the four applications of mind fulness, the inspection or inquiry is definitely a subtle form of sha matha. This kind of situation is called similar word with exalted meamng.
Another method that speeds up the realization of emptiness is loving compassion. There are two types of bodhichitta: relative and ultimate. Loving compassion is the relative bodhichitta. The more we apply being loving and compassionate, and the more we train at the same time in stillness, the more opportunity we have to realize ultimate bodhichitta, which is the realization of emptiness suffused with compassion. Through the practice of relative bodhichitta, compassionate emptiness is realized increasingly, and this realization is both effortless and spontaneous.
STUDENT: Could you explain a little more about shamatha with support? 
RINPOCHE: As I just said, shamatha practice is the training in being quiet and calm. This is very unlike the usual state of our mind, which is continually disturbed by waves of emotions and thoughts. These waves need to subside. Shamatha practice allows these emotional waves to calm down. There are many types of shamatha, but they can all be included within two types: shamatha with focus, and shamatha without focus.
To train in shamatha with a focus or support, you might start by placing a small stone or stick in front of you, at a comfortable angle for viewing. Simply look at it, without forming a lot of thoughts about the object or investigating what it is. Just keep your attention focused on it, as a support for not thinking of anything else. Simply do that. Do not try to discover something special about the stone or pebble. Another support I mentioned is paying attention to the movement of the breath in the natural process of exhaling and in haling. This type of practice is also something neutral; it is a way to calm down our attention, to settle our focus.
The more calm and quiet our attention can be made through this training, the easier it is to be introduced to vipashyana, the clear seeing which is thought-free wakefulness. That is why shamatha is important. In the New School lineages of Tibetan Buddhism, it is taught that one should ideally train in practicing shamatha for one year, to begin with. Next best is to practice it for six months, or at least for three months. This is how it is written in the guidance manuals for meditation. It is also taught like this: first be skilled in remaining calm, remaining in shamatha. Next, be skilled in destroying the calm, because it is not good enough to be stuck there. 
STUDENT: What does the statement that every sentient being has the potential for being enlightened mean? 
RINPOCHE: The very heart of Vajrayana practice is the view of Mahamudra and Dzogchen. We train in this view until we attain stability in the view, which is the nature of mind, the natural state. According to the general teachings of the Buddha, everyone has the capacity to be enlightened. Buddha nature means that this capacity is present in each one of us, as a seed, as a potential. That is why it is logical or reasonable that anyone who practices will eventually be enlightened. When you take the seed of flower and you place it in a situation which is conducive for its growth - good soil, an ample supply of fertilizer, the right degree of warmth, space, and water, and the right amount of time - then whenever these factors are present, the seed will grow every single instant. On the other hand, perhaps you have all the conducive factors - the fertile soil, the fertilizer, water and warmth, the space for something to grow- but what you plant is not the seed of a flower. Maybe you've unfortunately mistaken a pebble for a seed. If you have planted a pebble, then no matter how long you wait, nothing will grow. 
If it wasn't for the fact that all sentient beings already had the seed potential, the substance of enlightenment within them, then no matter how much effort we put into practice, nothing would hap pen, we wouldn't be enlightened. If you churn water, you never get butter, right? Only if you churn milk do you get butter. That is what is meant by potential. Because all of us have the potential for being enlightened, whoever truly perseveres can be enlightened. 
Of course, when an individual is densely obscured by the two obscurations, by intense negative emotions, it is not very easy. You could say that for such a person buddhahood is far away. Conversely, for someone in whom the layer of disturbing emotions is thinner, their intelligence will be brighter, and such a person would have an easier time progressing towards enlightenment. It will be an easier process.
No SAMSARAAPART FROM THOUGHTS
UP UNTIL THIS POINT, our main meditation practice has been to rest our mind in a calm way, in stillness. Now, let us take a step further and move into the insight of vipashyana, the clear seeing. While in the relaxed state of shamatha, we should now train in see ing the mind's nature very clearly. These two practices of stillness and insight, shamatha and vipashyana, are the very heart of Bud dhist meditation training. Our minds have two sides, positive and negative. Because there is a negative aspect to our minds, our nature at present is called obscured suchness. We need to change this, and remove the obscurations covering the suchness or essential nature. The way to do so is by means of vipashyana, which in this context can be considered thought-free wakefulness.
While thought-free wakefulness is an excellent starting point for training, it is not so easy to simply start here. Shamatha practice is the preparation or prelude that makes it easier to recognize the state of thought-free wakefulness and train in it. Training in simply being at peace allows our busy minds to calm down and remain quietly. Through training in shamatha, we will become much more able to recognize the state of thought-free wakefulness.
In the previous chapter I talked about shamatha. Here, I would like to introduce the training of vipashyana. First of all, what is the difference between shamatha and vipashyana- how do we distin guish between these two? When training in shamatha, there is some sense of resting, of being quiet and tasting a feeling of quiet peace. There is a sense of being fond of that feeling, of being attached to it. When remaining in a very calm and quiet way, we are primarily un disturbed by sense impressions. None of the six kinds of sense im pressions move us. If we really become absorbed into this state of stillness in a steady, stable way, it doesn't matter if the weather is too cold or too hot or if an insect bites us. Discomforts like those won't bother us; in fact, we may not even feel them. There is a taste of tranquility, a taste of serenity in shamatha practice that we could become too addicted to, to such an extent that we don't want to get involved in anything else. We enjoy remaining quietly uninvolved.
True stability in shamatha is accompanied by many powers, even if one has not yet attained stability in vipashyana. In stable shama tha, some miraculous powers such as clairvoyance may occur, as well as many other qualities. But shamatha itself is not liberation. One does not become free through shamatha, and definitely not enlight ened. There is no freedom here because of that fondness, the cling ing to the taste of shamatha. It's because we are so interested in that feeling of quietness that we are hindered from moving further. While shamatha is not the ultimate practice, it is important because it is the support or basis for vipashyana. When the surface of a body of water is calm, it can reflect your face. Similarly, when your mind, your attention, is calm, it is possible to see clearly the nature of mind. This clear seeing is vipashyana.
The sole difference between enlightened and unenlightened beings is the presence or absence of obscuration. It may be a cloud less, clear, sunny sky, or a sky obscured by clouds. In either situation, the sun always rises in the morning, moves up and across the sky, and sets at night. The only difference is whether or not clouds are present in the sky, and how dense the layers of clouds are.
The Uttaratantra as well as other texts describe three stages of mind: impure, half-pure and totally pure. It is like the example I just mentioned of the different kinds of weather. The sun can be com pletely obscured; it can be covered by a thin haze; or perhaps there are no clouds at all, and the sun is totally unobscured. The example of thick clouds points at our emotional obscuration, our preoccupa tion with selfish emotions. Aren't we sometimes totally caught up in love or hate? Just like water boiling, we find we cannot control our selves. This situation is called disturbing emotion, and it is definitely an obscuration. At that very moment of loving or hating, our innate suchness is densely obscured. Similarly, we may also have more doc ile or mild thoughts of attraction or aversion, which run like this: "I like this. I don't like that." These ordinary likes and dislikes are not such strong involvement in emotion, and yet they do obscure the basic suchness of our minds.
The most subde type of obscuration is to simply conceive of something -like simply thinking, "It is." Any notion we may hold is still a way of conceptualizing the three spheres: subject, object and action. Whenever there is a thought which conceives the three spheres, karma is created. People ask, "What is karma? I don't get it! Where is karma?" In fact, karma is our mind conceiving something. Karma is the doings of conceptual mind. This subde forming of a notion of anything is like a web, a haze that obscures our innate suchness just as mist obscures the sun from being vividly seen.
The great master Nagarjuna said, "There is no samsara apart from your own thoughts." Samsara is based on thought; samsara is made by thought. A thought includes attachment and aversion. A thought by its very nature involves an attitude of selecting and excluding. Every thought is hope and fear. Hope and fear is painful, in the sense of making you uneasy. Implicit in hope is the idea that "I have not yet achieved." That is painful, isn't it? Likewise, fear is accompanied by the thought, "It may happen and I don't want it." That is also painful; that is also suffering. Whenever there is involvement in thought, whenever a thought is formed, there is disturbing emotion. There is hope and fear, and therefore there is suffering.
Generally speaking, from a Dharma perspective, freedom or lib eration means free of samsara. Samsara is commonly associated with the six classes of sentient beings in the three realms - desire realms, form realms and formless realms. We may think, "To be liberated is to escape from ending up as one of the six classes of sentient beings in the three realms." We may even think we have to go to some other place in order to be liberated. But honesdy, connecting this direcdy to our own experience, freedom means free from any type of thought - bad thought, good thought, neutral thought. After hear ing this we may think, "Certainly we should be free of evil thoughts, but not good thoughts - we should keep good thoughts. All good actions are done by a good attitude, a good thought. If a good thought is thrown away, who will do good?" However, we need to understand that there are different kinds of good. There is condi tioned goodness and unconditioned goodness, and the goodness of the state of unity. Conditioned goodness means any good action, words or attitude formed out of a good, wholesome thought. That is definitely virtuous. But unconditioned goodness means being free of thought and acting while in the state of the innate nature, out of dharmata. Unconditioned goodness is nonconceptual; it is beyond thought.
We need to gain the taste of liberation through experiencing the awakened state, and then proceed to enlightenment. In actuality, freedom means freedom from dualistic mind. Freedom from selfishness, holding the idea of "1", freedom from holding the notion of other, "of that." Free of any type of conceptual attitude that something is, or something isn't. Otherwise there is no freedom. To hold the no tion "It is" is still a way of holding. To hold the notion "That isn't" is also a way of holding. When we have the notion, "All this inside and outside of me; all this exists," it is a conceptual attitude. Likewise, when we form the notion, "All this inside and outside of me does not exist," it is also a conceptual attitude.
Shamatha practice involves allowing our state of mind to be calm, to be at ease. Vipashyana is simply letting the mind be in equanim ity, free of forming concepts, in thought-free wakefulness. For this vipashyana, the insight of clear seeing, to take birth in us, it is im portant to gather the accumulations, to purify the obscurations, and to train in shamatha.
Merely being calm is not true liberation. It is closer to liberation, because it is free from waves of emotions. If somebody asks, "Are you now free of emotions in the state of shamatha?" you could an swer, "Almost!" But the root cause for further emotions is still re tained in this state. When the root is kept, the plant will grow back. The root of further emotions needs to be destroyed. There is only one way to do that, and that is through training in vipashyana, the clear seeing which is thought-free wakefulness. Nothing else can do that job totally; nothing else can completely cut through the root of all thoughts. On a more general level, the root cause of samsaric ex istence is ego-clinging, the attitude of holding onto a sel£ In a more subtle way, it is the conceptual attitude, the mental doing, the forming of a thought. So to be free of samsara we need to train in the direct opposite of its root cause; we need to train in the thought free wakefulness which is the absence of any conceptual attitude. This entails also being free of ego. But it is not only being free of ego - it is the knowing of the state that is free of ego. In other words, it is the knowledge that realizes egolessness, also called the knowledge of the threefold purity, the wakefulness that does not conceptualize the three spheres.
According to the Tibetan tradition, true vipashyana is to see the natural state while being free of dualistic clinging. Traditionally, this natural state is introduced after the practitioner has gone through the ngondro, the 'preliminary practices of the four or five times hundred thousand', as well as the yidam practice with its detailed recitations. Mter completing these, the student is given the pointing-out instruction according to the tradition of Dzogchen or Mahamudra or one of the other traditions of ultimate wisdom. That is the general way, but times have changed somewhat in the sense that many people these days are earnestly drawn to the essential teachings from the beginning. My late father, Tulku Urgyen Rinpoche, used to give the pointing-out instruction to whomever was sincerely interested, whether that person was a long-term practitioner or a beginner. He also gave me the mandate to do so. With this perspective in mind, I feel that it would be a good idea to go into more detail about vipashyana.
All of my root gurus were great masters who had realized the natural state.t I am not someone who has complete or perfect realization. But I do have one thing, deep respect and trust from the core of my heart. Based on this respect and trust, I have the courage to feel that I probably have received blessings from the masters of the lineage. What I am going to explain are instructions my own root gurus gave me. I will simply repeat a few things.
Confusion is made by our minds. Karma, disturbing emotions, and all the different modes of experience are all mind-made. Mind is the main creator of everything. If we allow our mind to continue forming dualistic fixation, samsara will continue endlessly. If you want to leave samsara behind, if you want to be free from samsara, you need to dissolve dualistic fixation. 
In order to let it dissolve, you need to train in the opposite of dualistic fixation. Thinking itself involves dualistic fixation. The opposite of this duality-fixated. 
You can arrive at nondual wake fulness the moment that thought vanishes - the moment that dualistic thinking falls apart or collapses. 
The moment dualistic thought vanishes, nondual wakefulness can be clearly present. 
Samsara is simply our thinking. Likewise, disturbing emotions and karma are merely our thinking. When we know the opposite of thinking, the essence of thought, we are free of samsara. In order to be free, we need to recognize this essence. Generally speaking, we need to be free of disturbing emotion. In a more subde way, we need to free from forming notions, free from conceptualizing that some thing is or that something isn't. This includes metaphysical concep tualizing such as, "I am mistaken, I am deluded," or that" All things are like a dream - it is all an illusion." This kind of thinking is also a way of fiXating.
Unless we allow every single kind of conceptualization - of forming a notion of something, whether it is in a coarse way or a subde way, shallow or profound - unless we allow all of that to dissolve, to simply evaporate, we do not clearly see our innate nature. Thinking "Because this is, that isn't. This should be selected, that should be excluded," is all mind-made. To think 'is' actually includes 'isn't'. Whenever something is denied, something is affirmed at the same time. Whenever something is rejected, another thing is automatically accepted. This dualism is the very nature of conceptual judgment. We need to be in a way in which there is no involvement in making any conceptual reference point of any kind, regardless of how subde or philosophically astute this might be.
How do we experience or see this freedom? Instead of using the phrase "seeing the nature of mind," maybe it is better to say "sustaining the continuity of mind essence." 'Mind' here means simply thinking. 'Mind essence' is buddha nature, also known as innate suchness. Innate suchness transcends all philosophical positions. A philosophical position is something we arrive at after having given detailed thought to what is. We thoroughly inquire, investigate, analyze, reject and accept, prove and disprove, until we reach a position that we feel we have verified, and can thus establish the conviction "This is how it is." We then hold onto that position, thinking "This is the ultimate, absolute formulation of how reality is. I've got it!" 
The natural state of mind, innate suchness, transcends all phi losophical positions because it is not a philosophy; it is not an idea. Any rational viewpoint, no matter how deep or profound, is still conceptual. It is based on concept, and thus within the domain of conceptual mind. Innate suchness is naturally beyond the bounds of conceptual mind, and is not its object. We need to distinguish be tween mind and mind essence, thinking and thought-free wakeful ness. We need to differentiate the conceptual mind from the basic state.
How dualistic mind or conceptual mind operates is described in the Buddhist metaphysical scriptures known as Abhidharma. The Treasury of Ahhidharma describes in great detail conceptual mind's different ways of operating, in terms of primary mind and the subsidiary fifty-one mental events, all the various ways in which dualis tic mind becomes involved in experience. Primary mind simply means the consciousness that is conceptual. Sense impressions themselves are not conceptual. When hearing, seeing, smelling, tasting, or noticing texture, we are not engaging in conceptual thought. It is only when the primary mind, consciousness, directs its attention to one of these sense impressions and starts to evaluate and judge that it becomes conceptual.
The Tibetan word sem, which we translate as the English word mind, has an explicit connotation of thinking of and holding some thing in mind. The Tibetan word for thought is namtog, which means conceptualizing an object, thinking of something. Whenever we see something nice, we start to form thoughts about it, don't we? If we hear a nice sound, we want to investigate it further, create thoughts about it. We think, "Oh, what lovely music- I like that." This process is namtog. When thinking of any object, we generally react in one of three basic ways: either we like it, we don't like it, or we don't care about it that much. To like is subtle attachment. To dislike is subtle anger. When we feel neutral or indifferent, it is sub tle dullness. Involving our attention through any of our five senses in this way creates karma, because we are forming the attitude of either like, dislike or indifference. This creates an habitual pattern of being fond of or against something. Through forming the habits of liking this and disliking that, over and over, again and again, our minds become inclined to automatically attach a solid reality to whatever we think of.
It's the same when we dream or daydream. When we think of a beautiful flower, mentally we experience a bit of enjoyment. Con versely, when we think of the disgusting, filthy garbage lying around the streets in Boudha, we have an opposite reaction. We understand these different words and connect them to some attitude we've formed in the past; in other words, we plug these concepts into pre existing attitudes. These words hold power in a way which is called habit, or habitual tendency. So, instead of saying, "I like such and such," we might just as well say, "It is my habitual tendency to be fond of that." 
To summarize, dualistic mind is severely flawed because it is lim ited to the attitudes of liking, disliking and feeling indifferent. It hopes and fears, accepts and rejects, and thus it suffers. Whenever there is thought, there is hope and fear; we've already discussed this point. Hope and fear itself is suffering. If we want to go beyond suffering, we need to be free of thought. If you want to be free of disturbing emotion, you need to be free of thought. If you want to be free of all the myriad of deluded experiences of samsara, you need to be free of thought. To want to continue thinking and still be free of samsara is impossible. (Rinpoche laughs). To remain attached to conceptual thinking and still arrive at liberation is impossible. To want to stop being hungry and yet refuse to eat creates an impossible situation, doesn't it?
Next, we need to look at where and what is buddha, the awak ened state. The Buddha said, "Buddha is present in everyone." How is this nature or quality present? Is our dualistic mind the buddha? If we say that dualistic mind is the buddha, then all sentient beings would already be buddhas and there would be a lot of buddhas who don't happen to manifest any enlightened qualities! If the dualistic mind is not the buddha, then what exactly is it in us that is the bud dha? This term must refer to something. Mind essence is the buddha. Mind is that which knows pleasure and pain. It is the very essence or identity of this knowing that is the buddha.
Where exactly is this mind that knows pleasure and pain? If we were to ask each of us, we would all have to say "It is in me." When saying 'me' we usually refer to this body of flesh and blood, this voice that speaks, and this mind that experiences, that feels pleasure and pain. But again, we need to ask: what exactly is it that feels pleasure and pain? 
One of the characteristics of mind is that it is empty, in the sense that it has not come into being as any concrete thing; it does not assume any particular form. At the same time, it is aware. It has a nature that knows, unobstructedly.
Mind's nonarising essence is empty and its nature is cognizant, unobstructedly aware. We speak about mind's two qualities, essence and nature. These two words describe the same identity. These qualities are an indivisible unity, just as you cannot separate water from its inherent wetness.
Now we need to ask: does this empty nature of mind exist, or not? Is there such a thing or not? If we say that it is, does it exist in the same way as some other concrete thing, like earth, water, fire or wind? We have to agree that mind is not material. The nature of mind does not exist in a material way like those four elements. Yet if you say it does not exist, you have to deal with the fact that it is not a total nothingness, because mind is capable of knowing in all different ways. We cannot deny our own basic intelligence; the fact that there is something in us that knows, that experiences in countless ways.
Thus, we cannot say that mind is nonexistent, that there is no mind. At the same time, we cannot say it exists in material form like the elements. We cannot say that mind is something we can see, hear, smell, taste or touch. If mind was a visible thing, we should be able to describe its shape: either square, round, spherical, or oval, whether it is long or short. Similarly, if mind were to have a physical form, it should also have a color and a smell. It is impossible for anything to have form and not have a color, isn't it? If you say that mind has form, it must have a color - so which color does your mind have? Likewise, anything that has form and color also has a smell of some sort. Does mind have a nice smell? Does its smell change over time? Does this mind have a physical form, a shape, a color? If mind had physical form, we should be able to touch it, to catch hold of it, keep it, and put it in a nice place. We are still talk ing about mind, that which experiences.
Mind, however, is described as inconcrete because it is intangible, formless. Being formless, it has no color, no smell, no tangible char acteristics whatsoever. Still, if it exists, we have to be able to describe it. We can start by saying that mind is empty. Empty mind is similar to space. It is important to note here that it is not the same as space; that this is only an example, not the literal meaning. If the example was the thing itself, there would be no need to use an example! Peo ple might say that your face is beautiful like a flower. If your face really was a flower, how would you look, with your head being an actual flower? You can't judge poetry too much; it's enough that it sounds nice. It's the same with examples. But if they are totally dis similar, you could not use that as an example either. What if we said, "Your face is beautiful like a withered flower" - how would that sound? Both are flowers; the only difference being one of time, in that one of the flowers is older. Just because of that, one example is nice, the other is quite rude.
Our mind, the knower, is like space because it has no form, color or shape. In short, mind is an empty cognizance. Space is merely empty. The empty quality of mind and the empty quality of space are similar. But mind can cognize; it can know, while space cannot. Because of this cognizant quality, its intrinsic ability to know, mind is called empty cognizance, while space is called empty void, empty nothingness. Mind is naturally empty and naturally cognizant. It is empty in essence and cognizant by nature - and these qualities are an indivisible unity, primordially, from the very beginning. No one made the self-existing, innate nature the way it naturally is. It is not made by either a divine or devilish power, nor did any human being create it. Nobody made mind the way it is; it is just naturally so.
It is because of mind's cognizant quality that we experience. And it is in the act of experiencing that we become confused. It is not through the empty quality that confusion arises - only through cognizing. This cognizant quality, when directed towards experiencing, fixates on things like "It is," and all thoughts of "I and mine, you and yours." In this process, there is attachment to the notion of me, and a subtle aversion to what is you and yours. This subtle attachment and aversion is mistaken, though, because really, ulti mately, there is no basis for these concepts of I and you! It is precisely our failure to know this that constitutes ignorance. This unknowing is the basis, the very root, of confusion. If this is where confusion starts, this is also where it should end. The originally empty cognizance fixates; it creates confusion. To be free, we need to experience the empty cognizance that does not fiXate. 
The unity of being empty and cognizant is how our mind essence naturally is. We can also describe this in terms of the three kayas. The aspect that is empty in essence, totally unconstructed, is the dharmakaya. Cognizant by nature, unobstructed, is the sambhoga kaya. And the capacity of this unity of emptiness and cognizance, which is ever-present and manifests in manifold ways, is the nirma nakaya. To employ Mahamudra terminology, the nonarising essence and the unobstructed nature have the capacity to manifest in myriad ways.
To apply this in terms of practice, we need to know how not to be caught up in our thinking. The very moment of being free of thought is dharmakaya. Thinking a particular thought does not make us thought-free. While a thought cannot remove thought, the presence of a thought can prevent thought-free wakefulness. In thought-free wakefulness, there is no thought. In thinking, there is no thoughtfree wakefulness. Presence and absence do not happen at the same moment; they are mutually exclusive. A conceptual attitude cannot dissolve a conceptual attitude. That which dissolves conceptual atti tude is the absence of holding anything in mind. A fixated thought does not dissolve the presence of fixated thoughts. The absence of fixation dissolves fixation. We need to clearly understand what the remedy is. The remedy to ego-clinging is the knowledge in which egolessness is an actuality. The remedy to thought is nonthought. When we know the remedy well, we can overcome what needs to be overcome. It is when we're not aware of or familiar with how to use the remedy that we fail to do that which needs to be done.
Let's practice for a few minutes right now. Remain wide open. Don't hold any reference point. If we focus on something, on any thing in particular, we are not wide open. When you are free of ref erence point, free of focus, you are wide open. It is very comfortable to be wide open.
STUDENT: Rinpoche, you talked about the process of conceptuali zing. How is this different from discernment? 
RINPOCHE: Mind is that which observes everything; that which no tices or experiences whatever takes place. Mind, in this context, is the mental cognition that works through the five senses. Unless the mind pays attention, we do not see, hear, smell, taste or feel any texture. Mind is thus the basis for all pain and pleasure. Whether we are deluded or not depends upon mind. Whenever we are caught up in the duality of perceiver and perceived, we experience delusion. When we are able to cut through this chain, this bind of perceiver and perceived, we are free.
The perceived is easy to understand: it is simply the objects we ex perience; whatever we see, hear, taste, smell or feel as a tactile sense. But there is also the perceiver, the mind within, which connects through the five senses and then takes hold of these objects and forms thoughts, concepts. For instance, when the eye consciousness connects with the visual form and takes hold of it, it will form a thought about what is seen. When we simply look with our eyes to wards something while our mind is strongly occupied by some other topic, we do not really see what is in front of us. Whenever our attention is directed towards what is seen, however - when we are interested in what we are viewing- we actually see it.
What happens is that the object seen through our eyes is con nected with mind through the act of seeing, and then thoughts are formed. The process of forming of thoughts in this way has two as pects to it, two degrees. One is more coarse, the next more subtle. For example, let's say we notice the outline of a human being. This is called conception. In other words, we form the concept, "There is a human being." But it is not clear to us yet who this person is, or whether we know that person or not. As we move closer in our minds, paying more attention, then we distinguish the details, "That is someone who looks such and such." Maybe it is an acquaintance, maybe not. That is a more detailed form of thought which we call discernment. Thus, there are two levels: conception and discern ment. At the first level of conception, our emotions of liking, dis liking or remaining indifferent cannot really gain any foothold. But when we start to discern, they can strike very strongly.
Take this example. The moment we discern that what we are looking at is beautiful, we experience some sense of being attracted, of having the notion, "I like that." Or, if the feeling of attraction be comes very strong, it's "I love it!" Our attention is attached to that notion of liking and the feeling of being attracted. If we are discerning something that is ugly, then in a subtle way we feel ourselves to be opposed to it; we feel some aversion. In a more strongly developed way, we absolutely hate the sight of it, we detest it. 
Now, if the object we are looking at evokes neither of these reac tions - say that it's something that provokes no interest, something that doesn't fascinate us in any way, something we don't want to in vestigate any further - then we shut off our mind to it; we simply close off. This is in a subtle way a kind of indifference. In a more strongly developed way, it can be outright dullness. So these three possible reactions of liking, disliking or being indifferent, which when experienced to a stronger degree manifest as desire, hate or dullness are all involvements of our mind towards the object we per ceive. This process happens again and again in the course of our daily lives, our ordinary perceptions.
As for the coarser or more strongly felt expressions of these three basic reactions, we do not have to be particularly religious to under stand that they are plainly no good. But you might ask: is there any thing wrong with just feeling like or dislike, or feeling indifference, towards the objects we see and hear, towards the smells, the tastes, and the textures we perceive? Is there anything wrong with liking something we hear, see, smell, taste or feel? What about when we feel mild aversion or dislike- is there anything wrong with that? And what's wrong with closing off our mind and remaining indifferent?
How about a noble attitude, a good heart? Is it something we should keep? It's supposed to be good, isn't it? So why should we destroy that? The best feeling we can have is to wish to help others and to directly act from that virtuous attitude. Is it good enough to always train in that? Or is there something wrong with that? If there is something imperfect in that, then what exactly is this shortcoming? We need to know this very clearly. If there is an imperfection in simply being good, we need to understand what that is. If there is something superior to being good, we need to know what it is and how to train in it.
My point here is that we need to be really clear. Let's say we think there is something better than simply being good, though we don't quite know what it is. Therefore, we conclude that having a good heart, a virtuous state of mind, is something that should be given up. We then throw away the good heart, and because we are not clear on what is superior to this, we fail to attain it! That would be a huge mistake. We need to be very clear about this point.
Let's take a step back and look at the situation. All these good thoughts, the nasty thoughts, the neutral thoughts - why do these thoughts come about? They are all due to a subde formation of a conceptual attitude. This attitude is as insidious and dangerous as a nasty disease, like a cancerous growth that starts out in one tiny litde place in the body. If it is allowed to grow, this disease can spread all over the entire body, making the chances for being cured extremely difficult. In the same way, the Buddhist metaphysical studies outlined in the Abhidharma discuss something called subtle developers. Unless we can get rid of these cancer-like subde developers, there is no way for us to be free of full-fledged negative emotions.
The Buddhist teachings tell us that there is a root cause for all kinds of deluded states of mind, for all deluded experience. There is a root cause for all kinds of karma, all types of emotions, all kinds of thoughts. They are all rooted in the very subde formation of a con ceptual attitude. Unless this subde conceptual attitude, this mental doing, is released and dissolved, there is no way in the world that we can be free from delusion; there is no way to be free from thoughts, from emotions, and from karma. In the same way as the example of a spreading cancer, we need to be free of the tiny root cause. Once we are free of that, all the rest can disappear quite naturally. The root of karma, the root of emotions and the root of delusion is a subtle concep tual attitude. To identity that root cause and the means of eradicat ing it is an extremely important point in Buddhist study.
DIVORCE
WE HAVE SET ouT to attain liberation and enlightenment. The reason we study, reflect and practice meditation is to attain liberation and enlightenment. Anything that helps this process is good and should be adopted. Likewise, anything which obstructs enlightenment should be avoided. Some circumstances are adverse, meaning they prevent liberation and enlightenment. Those include stinginess, in other words, the emotional obscurations. They ob struct the attainment of freedom and omniscient enlightenment and are always to be avoided. Other circumstances are conducive to being free and awakened. These are the six paramitas, the five first of which are means, and the sixth which is knowledge- in particular, the knowledge of realizing egolessness.
As the paramitas indicate, we need both means and knowledge. These two aspects should always be combined. Means without knowledge does not help much. Similarly, knowledge without means does not help much. Means and knowledge are like our feet and our eyes: if we can walk and we can see, we can get to our destination. If we have legs but cannot see, we will not know where to go. Likewise, if we can see but have no legs, we cannot arrive. We need both. The first five of the paramitas, the means, are like legs to walk on, while the sixth, transcendent knowledge, is like the ability to see clearly. When we can both walk and see, we won't waste our effort because we will be moving in the right direction. When we unify means and knowledge, the effort we put into proceeding to wards freedom and enlightenment is never wasted.
Every thought is an involvement in hope and fear. Because this is an important point, I will reiterate it once more. We need to know ex acdy what freedom means from a Buddhist perspective. Generally speaking, freedom means being free of rebirth among the six classes of beings within the three realms - free in the sense that we do not need to involuntarily take rebirth in a state of suffering against our own wishes. That is freedom. The driving force that spins us through samsara, among the six classes of beings, is nothing other than our own thinking. Whatever one does while caught up in de luded ordinary thoughts only causes further samsaric existence. When our disturbing emotions and our grasping is not so intense, we end up in the realms of humans and gods. When our emotions, our clinging, are very intense, the experience we have is that of hell realms, of hungry ghosts or of animals. Even though we may look like a human being, if our emotions and selfishness are incredibly rigid and uptight - if we are terribly aggressive, angry, hateful and attached, jealous, and so on- our experience is like that of being in hell.
It is also possible, in the first part of our life, that we are totally caught up in selfish emotions and hold on so rigidly to a solid, per manent reality. Eventually, though, we may begin to learn, toques tion and find out how things are. Through this process we may loosen up our mental grip on things and become more relaxed, more content, and more at ease with ourselves. That is also possible.
To sum up everything I've just said, we could say that the maker of all pleasure and pain is mind. The joys and sorrows experienced by all sentient beings of the six realms are made by mind. Even the happiness and suffering experienced during the course of one single day is all experienced by mind.
Since mind is inconcrete or insubstantial, it cannot be fulfilled. Its craving is inexhaustible. The problem with normal mind is that it never gets enough. If mind could somehow become satisfied, then there would be an end, a limit. But even when we get what we think we want, it is never enough. It seems that we always want what we do not yet have. We want whatever is most difficult to get, and that is hard. If we do happen to achieve what we aimed at for so long, that which was so hard to get, that again is not enough. We set a new aim in mind. It turns out that the achievement was not that great after all, despite our enormous desire for it.
In other words, the Very thought is an involvement in hope and fear. The hope and fear may be subtle, of medium strength or quite in tense, but there is no exception. Hope and fear is by definition an uptight, narrow-minded mental state, and that is painful. Intense hope and fear is intensely painful. When we are occupied by intense hope and fear, food does not taste good, and it's even hard to sleep. The objects of the five senses are no longer beautiful. As hope and fear subside to a moderate level, we can start to enjoy what we see, hear and taste, at least a little bit. When we are only slightly an noyed with a subtle level of hope and fear, we say, "I am happy - how nice! What a nice day!" 
If we look back upon that fine, nice day, however, we will notice that even then there were repeated moments of subtle hope and fear. They are always lurking latently in the background, just waiting to pop up in full bloom. We probably don't notice them in the course of our everyday experience, but they are still there. We try to convince ourselves that we are not anxious or annoyed about anything, and we call that happiness. It seems that we need to fool ourselves in this way, because acknowledging reality is simply too painful. So, is there really ever any moment in which we are truly happy? Honestly, those moments of being happy, unafraid, at ease and totally fearless are very rare. For this we have conceptual thinking to blame: truthfully, it does not have that many great qualities.
We need to be free of selfish emotions. Selfish emotions are merely thoughts. Thought states are given different names: emotional thought, neutral thought, virtuous thought, hostile thought, selfish attitude, emotional attitude. Compared to selfishness, a neutral frame of mind is better. For example, to think "Water is water; the sky is the sky" is a neutral thought. To think water is water is not necessarily good nor evil. Compared to a neutral thought, a wholesome or virtuous frame of mind is better - for instance, "I want to help others." Any kind of noble-hearted attitude is a good thought. Therefore, at any time and in any situation a good thought, a good attitude, is something we should try to adopt. An aggressive attitude based on selfishness is always to be avoided, because ill will and aggression makes both ourselves and others uneasy. As well, it makes us create negative karma.
This is exactly what I meant when mentioning conducive and ad verse circumstances. To be deeply upset physically and mentally in the ways that we label jealousy, anger, attachment, dullness, conceit - all these make it more difficult to experience thought-free wake fulness, and therefore they are called adverse circumstances. That is also called negative karma. The opposite of that - when we have a benevolent, loving, helpful attitude and we carry it into our words and actions - is called conducive, virtuous, wholesome karma, good karma. Those are helpful circumstances. The person who wants to progress in shamatha and vipashyana, should adopt whatever is helpful, whatever is a conducive circumstance. That is truly intelli gent. To understand that whatever interrupts that progress and whatever works against it is not good, and to also avoid whatever prevents or hinders, that is also intelligent. Intelligence doesn't only involve creating situations of temporary comfort until we die. That is not necessarily complete intelligence. True intelligence means to look a little further and see what facilitates that which is of ultimate benefit- liberation and enlightenment. That is real intelligence.
True freedom means to be free from se(ftsh emotions. All emotional states are basically thoughts. We understand now that thoughts can be of three types: evil, neutral and good. Evil thoughts or negative states of mind are always to be abandoned. They create negative karma and suffering. Neutral thoughts do not help, they do not harm; they are indifferent. They are also to be abandoned. Good thoughts, however, should be adopted. Good thoughts create conditioned virtue, conditioned goodness, the result of which is rebirth within the higher states of samsara. Experiencing a lovely environ ment and a pleasant situation is called rebirth among gods and humans. Conditioned virtue brings pleasant results. That is not lib eration, however; one is still within a samsaric state. One has not transcended the basis of thought, which is dualistic ftxation, the du alistic frame of mind. In order to go beyond that, we need to train in its opposite: we need to ftrst recognize the state of thought-free wakefulness. Recognize that and develop its strength through train ing, and ftnally attain stability in thought-free wakefulness. That is how to be free of samsaric existence.
Why does the training in present, fresh wakefulness make us free from samsaric states? Because it undermines, eliminates, and com pletely dissolves the very root cause for further samsara, which is ftxation on duality. It destroys the conceptual frame of mind that holds on to self and other. Since training in it destroys the cause of samsara, thought-free wakefulness is a primary cause for freedom and liberation. This is the essential training in Buddhism.
To adopt a virtuous frame of mind, a wholesome attitude, is good; it is regarded as a valid method. Similarly, avoiding a negative attitude or an unwholesome frame of mind is good; it is also re garded as a valid method. But neither of these are enough to be free from samsara.
Imagine that an individual could somehow sponsor all human beings and animals and insects, and give them whatever they needed so that everyone could take a holiday for the rest of their lives and not have to work. That one single person would be the benefactor of all beings. Would the enormous amount of goodness created by this action be enough for that individual to be liberated from samsara?
No, it would not. Undoubtedly it is a great kindness, it is very pow erful action, and it would be an immensely good thing to do. Still, something is lacking, and that is the knowledge. There is a lack of insight into the root cause of confusion.
You may be familiar with the ten unvirtuous actions and their opposites, the ten virtuous actions. Imagine that we practice the first nine of these for an incredible long time in an amazingly vast way. For example, instead of killing others, we save their lives. Instead of taking what is not given or stealing, we are generous in a spectacu larly lavish way. Instead of being frivolous, we practice pure ethics in relationships, according to whatever religion we follow or whatever civilization we are in. Those are the three ways of physical virtuous actions.
Similarly, instead of slandering, we reconcile all disagreements. Instead of speaking harshly, we speak gendy. Instead of idle gossip and poindess talk, we speak meaningfully and with purpose. In terms of mental virtues, we should give up ill will. The opposite of craving is to rejoice in the happiness of others. To give up ill will, to be loving and kind in all different ways, again and again - all these are good. But the most important of all is the last one, the tenth virtuous action. Without this, something is missing.
Unless we can embrace our activities with the tenth virtuous ac tion, which is holding the correct view - the opposite of harboring wrong views - we may perform the first nine virtuous actions over and over again for a very long time, carrying them out in immense ways. Still, the result of that will be nothing other than in a future life we will be beautiful, wealthy, and have long life, good health, and many agreeable companions. We will experience all sorts of ex cellence in astounding ways, but we are not truly free, because the nine virtues are still only conditioned goodness. Conditioned good ness is good, it is beneficial, and it brings pleasant results. Still, it is not ultimate.
In this world, there are plenty of people who are not religious in any way. But if you ask them, "Is a good heart good, or not?" They will say, "It is." "Is it good to help others through one's words, through one's physical actions?" They will answer, "Yes it is, it is good." Basically, most everyone in this world agrees about what is good and what is evil. No matter where, people always say it is bad to kill your fellow citizen; it is bad to beat up your neighbor; it is bad to deceive a friend with lies; it is better to be nice.
The tenth virtue, however, the true view, is both the most diffi cult to have and the most beneficial. If you have that, it in itself is enough; it is sufficient. Similarly, when you lack this one thing, nothing else ultimately helps. This one factor is to recognize our in trinsic wakefulness, our innate nature. This may seem difficult, because our basic nature is not an object of thought. But it can also be very easy, because it requires no effort.
Most of our trouble is troublesome precisely because it requires effort. Something is hard because you need to apply physical effort: you have to say something, or you have to make a mental effort. When something requires an effort for a long time, we say that it is difficult to do. When something requires only minor effort, we call it easy. When someone says, "Take the day off- today you don't have to do a thing," that means we are not required to make any physical, verbal or mental effort. Then we think, "How wonderful! It's going to be a holiday!" 
The difficulty in recognizing our innate nature is our ingrained habit of always trying to do something. When a Buddhist meditation master finally tells us, "Don't do anything," it is not easy! From the moment we wake up, we feel that we need to occupy our minds with some thing. We need to think of something. It is a habit. When we do not think, it feels uncomfortable; it is like something is not right. We need to think of something, hold on to something, get some thing, pursue something - either good or bad, it doesn't really matter. We need to have an attitude about something, and if we do not, we feel uneasy. It makes us feel like, "I lost myself; there is something wrong." It may feel scary.
We occupy ourselves in numerous ways. We can latch on to things through our eyes, through our ears, through our nose, what ever. All this is merely mind making itself busy, occupying itself in various ways. The moment this mind occupies itself through the eyes, it thinks about what it is going to see. A sound is heard, so we pay attention to it and make thoughts about that. And so on, and so on, chasing and chasing, running and running. In the course of this constant process there is no stability, no steadiness.
The famous saying goes, "sense-impressions are seductive, mind is fickle. " It is so easy to get carried away after this and that. Mind, the experiencer, seems to be powerless, as it is continuously overtaken by objects. No matter how much mind tries to occupy itself with nice sense impressions, beautiful sights and melodious sounds, these are very difficult to experience continuously. Even when we achieve pleasurable sensations for a while, it is still not good enough. We chase after sense pleasures for months and years, regardless of how difficult it is to do so or how much suffering it causes us. That kind of attitude seems to have a lot of tenacity. The fickle, restless frame of mind shows immense fortitude in relentlessly chasing after sense pleasures. That is how it is.
Right now, sights, sounds, smells, tastes and textures appear to be concrete and real to us. But the mind that chases after them is in concrete and has a hard time catching them - a very hard time! Maybe it's better that there is a divorce! If the concrete and the in concrete could somehow have a harmonious relationship, well, all right - let them live together. But the concrete seems to haunt the inconcrete mind; it seems to torture it. Of course, we cannot have a permanent split between mind and concrete reality, a real divorce. However, wouldn't it be a good idea to separate and occasionally have some space? That divorce comes about through the state of shamatha and vipashyana. When one is resting in stillness, the conceptual attitude that grasps is not blatantly present; it has subsided somewhat. And when one practices the vipashyana of thought-free wakefulness, even the subtlest attempt to grasp is totally absent, to tally dissolved.
In this world, don't we regard intelligence as something impor tant and precious? And not only for human beings - we also say admiringly "What a smart animal!" Intelligence is certainly good. The highest degree of intelligence is the knowledge that realizes egolessness. True intelligence is the intelligence that sees the absence of self.
We also speak of being good, being a gentleman, a nice person, a gentle lady. The highest goodness is to he compassionate. Whether it's experienced within or expressed outwardly, compassion is always good. Whenever somebody asks you what Buddhism is about, and you want to make it simple, just say these two words: intelligence and compassion. Of course, there is a lot to say about compassion, which is a very vast topic in Buddhism. Briefly, there are two types of compassion: with and without focus, or directed and undirected compasswn.
To summarize, freedom means to be free of disturbing selfish emotions. It means to be free of all of samsara. To transcend sam sara is to be free of every conceptual state of mind: free of all thoughts, whether they be good thoughts, neutral thoughts or evil thoughts. It is also to be free of any conceptual attitude that holds onto anything as being or not being permanent, solid, or real. To be totally free of all this is true freedom. The true view is the moment every conceptual attitude dissolves.
This true view is not a philosophical position. To be free from every type of conceptual attitude, does not require taking a mental stance, to claim that something is or is not. When we are free of all that, the innate nature at that moment is no other than what it simply is. We are the true nature of mind. At that moment, you can say that the obscurations have dissolved; they are purified, cleared away.
That is called unobscured suchness. To change from experiencing obscured suchness to actually being unobscured suchness, it is nec essary to train. In the beginning, the training is deliberate; it involves effort. The kind of deliberate effort we need - deliberate training - eventually leads to effortlessness. The real training is effortless ness. Being effortless is also a training. It's rather paradoxical, because there is no thing being trained in, and there is no act of doing anything either. Yet it's still called training! It can also be called meditation, but there is no meditating on something. To make this effortless training an actuality for ourselves, we need to first apply some effort. Here is how.
Right now, do not follow any memory of the past. Do not plan anything for the future. Whatever appears to you in this present moment through your senses or in your mind, do not conceptualize or judge or evaluate it. Remain totally disengaged. Leave your eyes open. In the practices of Mahamudra and Dzogchen, the eyes are called the gates of wisdom; do not close them. In the general teachings and specifically in shamatha practice, one closes the eyes in order to avoid being occupied by what is seen, and thus distracted from the state of calm. But from a Vajrayana, Mahayana or Dzog chen perspective, this logic is flawed. If it helps to close the eyes, why only the eyes? You would have to close your ears, nose, skin, and everything else too, in order to be totally shut off. The instruction is this: 
Leave the five senses wide open.
Let awareness be undirected
Remain totally open.
Do not get involved in perceived objects.
Do not form thoughts about them.
Be composed in that way.
Wide open.
Awake.
Empty, awake, wide open.
That is how it is described. Madhyamaka teachings emphasize the utterly empty quality of this state, while the Anu Yoga and the new tantras use the description sheer bliss. More elaborately, this state is described as "emptiness endowed with the supreme of all aspects indivisible from unchanging great bliss." The Dzogchen teachings on the primordial purity aspect of Trekcho describe it as total nakedness. These words and their meaning are extremely pro found, but also quite appealing, quite delightful.
Utterly empty emphasizes the view of emptiness. Sheer bliss em phasizes the training in blissful emptiness. The key point is phrased as "Blissful, yet unattached; awake, yet not clinging." That is very important. It is all right to be blissful, but not to dwell on the bliss. Similarly, our nature is awake by itself, but to cling to that, is a de fect. The Dzogchen teachings on nondual awareness use the word total nakedness. That means that rigpa or self-existing wakefulness, once it is distinguished from dualistic mind, is free of duality and totally laid bare, all by itself.
At the beginning it is a good idea to train in being awake and wide open in our meditation sessions. Otherwise the training is likely to be interrupted by distractions. The whole purpose of having monasteries and retreat centers or hermitages is because our attention is so easily carried away. These diversions can be outer distrac tions, the company of the people with us, or simple laziness. There are so many things to do in the city at all times, and good and bad company does influence us. Therefore, compose yourself during for mal meditation periods and practice remaining undistracted.
The view is not a thing to be viewed.
Meditation is not an object to be cultivated.
Train in being unpolluted by conceptual attitude.
Utterly empty, 
Wide open, 
Sheer bliss, 
Total nakedness, 
Vividly awake, 
Alive, 
Vibrant, 
Spacious.
In this context, 'meditation' means training in being this way, in a state in which dualistic ftxation has been suspended. At that moment, there is no samsara. Samsara has dissolved. There is no practice superior to this one, to having dissolved samsara. In this moment, there is no karma or selftsh emotion being formed, there is nothing to affirm, nothing to deny, no hope, no fear.
You do not need to solidify the concept that this state is. You do not need to hang on to the concept that something is not. Basically and fundamentally, our mind is utterly empty, sheer bliss, totally naked. We do not need to make it like this; we do not need to cultivate it by meditating, to create this state by meditating. The mind's nature is primordially free, free of karma and disturbing emotion, free of samsaric deluded experience, free from the conceptual atti tude of holding onto is and is not, free of the need to accept, the need to reject, free of all hope and fear.
To bring this forth in actuality, we need to persevere; we need to apply a lot of effort in being effortless. We need to meditate in a way of not meditating. Nothing to do- that is a big job! Not doing anything at all is something we really have to apply ourselves to. It is okay to not move. That is to be effortless. To move is effort. To speak is also effort. We do not need to speak at all. Similarly, to hold something in mind, to form thoughts about this, that and the other, is also mental effort. Totally drop, completely let go of every mental effort. Give up thinking of anything at all, about the past, the future or the present. Remain thought-free, like an infant.
Not ftxating means not forming the thought "This is it." Remain unpolluted by any notion of holding something in mind. Let go totally. It is often said that recognizing this resembles seeing space. Can you see space? Can you experience space? When you see or ex perience space, do you see it as a presence or an absence? Do you somehow see that absence? 
Space is not a thing to see. To see that there is no thing to see we call 'seeing that there is space.' If we were somehow seeing it as a thing, it would not be space, it would be an entity like earth, rock or water, some elemental substance like that. Space, however, is not composed of physical form; it is openness. We give a name, we apply a label to that which has no form and is wide open: we call it space. Space is utterly unlike concrete things. It is exactly because it is inconcrete that we call it space. When seeing concrete things, we see the presence of something that is. When seeing the inconcrete, we actually see its presence as an absence. Seeing that there is something to see is usually called seeing. Seeing that there is nothing to see is also seeing; it is okay to call it seeing. It is just a different manner of seeing. In the same way, when seeing or experiencing emptiness, empty means that there is no physical form, shape, color and so on to notice -just like space. The -ness in emptiness means cognizance, knowingness. All wisdom experience unfolds out of this cognizance. All the experiences of the kayas and wisdoms come out of this cognizance.
The empty quality, the quality of basic space beyond all con structs, is called dharmakaya. This empty cognizance is already pre sent as our minds. When anyone asks you to define mind, the an swer "empty cognizance" is quite all right. If someone says definefire, and we say "hot and burning," that is okay. To define water as "wet and liquid" is also fine. We can define wind as "light and mov ing." And we can define space as "vast, open, accommodating, impartial, with no center and no edge, intangible." That is space. You could say it is nonexistent, because it does not exist as a solid, concrete thing. It is rather an all-pervasive absence. In the same way, defining mind as "empty cognizance" is a good definition. The general definition of mind in Buddhism is cognizant and conscious. Samsara evolves from this empty cognizance that is mind when the cognizant quality fixates and gets involved in clinging. When the cognizant quality remains free of fixation, the immensity of the wisdom experiences of kayas and wisdoms unfolds.
STUDENT: I'm confused!
RINPOCHE: Confusion can be understood as the mistaken way that ordinary beings experience reality. Confusion means to be mistaken about what is; believing that things are real and permanent while they are not. In fact, it is impossible for anything to really exist; existence is only something that one believes. This belief happens be cause we are unaware of, ignorant of, the true nature of all things. First there is ignorance; then the act of holding onto an '1,' a self, where no such identity actually exists, and of believing there is an 'other' where no such 'other' exists. This ignorance is the very basis for the notion of 'self and other': it is the failure to know that these concepts have no reality to them whatsoever.
The basic ignorance triggers attachment to 'self and aversion to 'other' and has been perpetuated in our mind stream for a very long time, in a vast, immense way. We need to dissolve this strong habit ual ignorance, but this is not something that happens from one moment to the next. While dreaming, the dreamer only believes that what is dreamt is real. He is not likely to think, "This is all an illu sion." Even if he were to think it, it would be very hard to simulta neously experience the dream as unreal. In exactly the same way, all that we experience right now is illusory. But it is very difficult to have that confidence and to actually experience everything as being insubstantial and unreal.
We need to allow our confusion to 'dawn as wisdom'; we need to let our deluded way of experiencing dawn as original wakefulness. How does this happen? It is only possible through recognizing and realizing the nature of mind.
Innate suchness is unobscured the moment you are not caught up in present thinking. The very moment we acknowledge the real, how reality truly is, any delusory notion about how things are is gone. How do we remain unspoiled by mistakenness? By not being caught up in duality.
According to the tradition of pith instructions, that which obscures in nate suchness is our conceptual attitude. The clinging to things as being real, as being 'me', as being permanent, concrete, existing, and so forth - all the different varieties of conceptual ftxation - are in short, our present thinking. In this present thinking, a nasty thought certainly obscures, but even a noble thought obscures the innate suchness. An unwholesome thought is a way of holding something in mind. A noble thought is equally a way of holding something in mind. They are equal in the sense that there is still the holding of an attitude; it is that holding which obscures, not the particular content of the thought. You remain bound, fettered, whether it be by a rusty iron chain or a beautiful golden chain studded with diamonds.
Being caught up in present thinking obscures innate suchness. Innate suchness is unobscured the moment you are not caught up in present thinking. How can we be not caught up? During a medita tion session, sit relaxed, with a straight back. The guidance texts say, "Place your body like a bundle of straw where the string tying it to gether has been cut." You are upright but sitting loosely, not in a rigid, forced way. The more relaxed, the better. "Your voice should be left to itself like a sitar where the strings have been cut." Do not speak. Breath in a gentle and unforced way.
"Your mind should be left like a water mill where the water has been diverted." In the past, in some places in the world, mills were driven by the flow of water. When the water was routed in another direction, the mill stopped spinning, because the mechanism was disengaged. Leave your mind like that. Disengage from following after what has happened in the past. Disengage from thinking of what is going to happen in the future. Do not evaluate or judge anything in the present moment. Remain without the need to react, correct, improve, accept or reject. Simply leave whatever is exactly as it is. Whenever there is a thought, let it come. When there is no thought, let there be no thought. In this way, the buddha mind can be revealed.
Let me paraphrase what Padmasambhava says in one of the verses among the Supplications in Seven Chapters, it is okay to per ceive, but do not cling. Whatever moves in the realm of sight, allow it to happen, but hold onto nothing. Not only what we see, but also what we hear, smell, taste, touch and experience in the realm of mind: let it all happen, but don't ftxate on it.
In other words, what we need is the opposite of conceptual thinking. Leave behind fixating, which is duality. Abandon the normal way of thinking, which is full of disturbing emotions. We need thought-free wakefulness in order to be face to face with our innate nature. Acknowledge the mind of the buddhas of the three times, the view of the Great Perfection, of Mahamudra, of the Middle Way. To be able to recognize this and sustain it, we need to perfect the accumulations and remove the obscurations.
THE LAMP THAT DISPELS IGNORANCE
TO REALIZE THE ORIGINAL COEMERGENT WISDOM, the natural state of wakefulness, we need to purif}r the obscurations, gather the accumulations and take the support of the blessings of an au thentic lineage of masters expressed through a qualified teacher. Understand that any effort besides these is merely a cause for tiredness.
In fact, all these famous points are embodied in the ngondro practices. The idea of tiredness here in this context means that any other thing that we may try to do or believe that somebody else can do for us, any intellectual information or effort to figure out the situation through reflection, is not going to be enough. Going on and on in those conceptual ways will only cause exhaustion. What we need to do is purif}r the obscurations, gather the accumulations, receive the blessings of a qualified master and obtain the pith instructions on how to realize the original state of wakefulness.
There are many stories of how this realization took place in the past - realization in Mahamudra being the original coemergent wisdom, while in Dzogchen it's described as cutting through to a state of primordial purity. Realization happened when accomplished masters met with worthy, receptive disciples - disciples who were totally ready, who had undergone prior training in this or former lifetimes and who had purified their obscurations and perfected the accumulations. When such a disciple connected with a master, it was sometimes not necessary to even speak a single word or to show a single gesture. Their merely being together could be enough for the state of realization to be transmitted. That is called "the mind-to mind transmission of the buddhas." 
There is also the "symbolic transmission of the knowledge hold ers," of the vidyadharas. Here, again without words, an accom plished master would merely show a gesture to the ready disciple, someone who has already undergone purification. For example, the master would point into space without saying anything, or hold up a natural rock crystal or point to it. Through this symbolic gesture the disciple would realize the original state of wakefulness and attain a state in which the realization of the guru was identical with his or her own. There are also many examples of the master speaking only a few words, perhaps a single sentence or a four-lined verse of teaching. He would whisper these through a copper tube, so that no one else could hear. These few words would be sufficient for the dis ciple to attain the same state of realization of that of the master. There are many examples like that in the past.
Nowadays, however, it seems that unless there is a foundation of study and reflection and the understanding gained through these, the knowledge that is the result of training does not begin to hap pen. This understanding that is the result of meditation training requires study and reflection. Thus, study and reflection are exceed ingly important. We may want to start meditating without first studying, and that is okay. However, it is quite possible that we do not know how or what to practice. It is a very good idea and ex tremely beneficial to learn something first and afterwards practice meditation. On the other hand, if we only study and reflect and do not get true understanding through practice, we only have theory. Intellectual understanding is not enough to cut through selfish emotions. First we need to have some basis in study and reflection and then apply that to gain understanding through meditation training.
Now for the essential, mind. Mind is that which thinks all differ ent things, one after the other, restlessly. That which accepts and rejects, judges. Who is anxious, who is restless, who is happy, who is sad? Isn't there something that does this, something that knows? That is mind. And when we investigate what is it that knows, we do not find a thing. Isn't that true? Do we all agree that there is some thing in us that knows? And also that we don't know where it is? It seems that it is wherever we are, right? If we believe it is in the brain, it is in the brain. If we believe it is in the arms and legs, it could be in the arms and legs. It is not nonexistent. Because if we claim that there is no mind, we would not know anything, there would be no experience, which is obviously not the case. There is some knowing in us, so we have to say, "Yes, there is mind." Can we take hold of this mind? Can we pin-point it? This knowing, is in tangible, yet is.
Previously we analyzed to some extent that mind has no physical form? And that which has no physical form cannot be an object you can look at. It is not something you can listen to or hear. You cannot smell it, taste it or take hold of it. It then seems like there is no mind. Doesn't it? But mind is not totally nonexistent like space. You cannot say it is like space. Mind is similar to space, but not identical with it. Having no physical form and no sound, smell, taste or texture is why space is called empty. Mind is empty. Mind is 'empty in essence', meaning devoid of a concrete identity.
Mind is naturally empty, originally empty. No one made mind empty, no one can. Yet, mind is not exactly like space, which is void and nothing else. Mind is empty, yet it can know. Mind is cognizant. Cognizance means conscious, able to know, able to feel, able to experience, able to perceive. This ability to know, to experience, to perceive, is in the empty mind. That is why we describe mind as being empty cognizance- because mind is both empty and cogni zant. While cognizing, mind is still empty. This being empty and being cognizant are primordially a unity. It is an original, natural unity, not a fusion created by anyone. No one had to unite empty cognizance; no one is able to do that. We call this a union, but hon estly, it means indivisibility. There are two kinds of unity: a unity that can again be separated and an indivisible unity. An example for indivisible unity is like water being wet or a flame being hot. These cannot be separated. The empty and cognizant quality of mind is indivisible, like water and wetness. That is the meaning of unity in this particular context.
This unity of being both empty and cognizant - is that some thing that was formed, or is it unformed? Intellectual philosophers in particular like to question in this way. A unity implies that there must have been two aspects, one empty, and the other cognizant, and that they became a unity at some point. Otherwise, why call it a unity, right? Being a unity of two aspects, it must have been formed from two separate entities. As you know, anything that is formed is by default impermanent; anything that is formed perishes. That is how a philosopher might think. If one were to believe that the unity of empty cognizance is something that was formed, that is conditioned, eventually it should also perish, vanish; disappear. Is that clear? 
However, this unity of empty cognizance is not formed, because it is empty and at the same time cognizant; while cognizing, it is empty. The term unity is a mere name attached to it because of these two qualities being indivisible. Actually, the nature of mind is not something formed; it is unformed. Therefore, it does not perish; nor does it come into being. This unity is beyond birth and death.
In short, our mind in essence is empty; by nature it is cognizant. This unity is unformed, and therefore does not arise, nor does it cease: it is beyond death and birth. This being empty in essence is a natural emptiness; this being cognizant by nature is a natural cognizance; and these being a unity is a natural unity. The unformed na ture of this unity is naturally unformed. This word 'natural' is very important. To repeat this important point: in essence our mind is empty; by nature, our mind is cognizant; and this unformed unity of empty cognizance is our basic state. The very moment that this natural empty cognizance does not ftxate on anything, then it is just like that, as it naturally is.
How does knowing that our mind is empty in essence help us? It helps us eliminate any idea that mind is a permanent, concrete thing that solidly exists. All such concepts are naturally eliminated by the simple understanding that the essence of this mind is empty. Do you understand this point? This is the effect, the direct result, of understanding 'empty in essence.' Next, while being empty, our mind cognizes. Understanding this fact of basic cognizance automatically eliminates any idea we may have that mind is a nothingness - the nihilistic view. Again, our mind is naturally an empty cognizance. In the very moment that we become aware of this fact, that we recognize it, in that same moment, any kind of incorrect belief is automati cally eliminated. Any kind of belief in eternalism or in nihilism, in permanence or nothingness, is automatically discarded. All kinds of wrong views are automatically eliminated by the mere fact of recog nizing how our nature is.
Ordinary kinds of philosophy emphasize one of these two as pects. Either they assume that, based on the cognizant quality, there is 'something'- there is a maker, something permanent- or, em phasizing the empty quality, they maintain that there is nothing at all, that existence is outright nothing. These are the two extremes of eternalism and nihilism.
You have heard that the Buddhist view is beyond these two ex tremes, right? If you simply allow yourself, your own mind, to just be for a moment, without fixating on any concept whatsoever, that in itself eliminates any extreme view. To hold the idea 'it is' is clinging. To hold the idea 'it is not' is also clinging. If you have to chose one of these, it is actually better to hold onto the idea 'it is,' because it is taught that if one clings to this eternalist perspective, one can still take rebirth in the higher realms. But if one holds the nihilistic idea 'it is not,' it is hard to get a high rebirth- and thus it is very easy to take a low one. We need to go beyond both extreme views.
When we let be in equanimity, how do we compose ourselves? First, we let our body be straight - upright, yet relaxed. Sit upright, but in a very relaxed, very free way. If the body is straight and loose, all the channels are straight and free, unconstrained, and thus it is much easier for the mind to be at ease. When beginning the actual training in Mahamudra or Dzogchen, one sets aside chanting during the meditation state. Mentally, we give up any kind of doing, even the virtuous kinds of visualization like giving and taking, tong/en practice. Drop all kinds of mental involvement. Leave your mind freely and evenly, as an unconstructed and unconfined empty cogni zance. Cognizance can be experienced in two different ways. It can be aiming at something and holding that in mind, or it can be un directed, holding nothing. When holding something, that is called dualistic mind. When holding nothing at all, it is free: that is mind essence itself.
Leave the five senses wide open.
We have eyes, 
We have ears, nose, tongue, body, 
Leave all these venues wide open, unoccupied.
Let your awareness be undirected.
This empty cognizance is mind.
Do not aim it at anything, 
Do not hold a reference point; 
Leave it wide open.
It is also said like this: 
Do not focus outwardly, 
Do not concentrate inwardly
Do not place the attention in between either.
Totally free.
Self-existing awareness is unimpeded.
Not obscured, not blocked, 
Not obstructed by anything.
Compose yourself like this.
(After a while, Rinpoche takes questions)
STUDENT: What is the benefit of training in samadhi? RINPOCHE: Goodness. Among all types of goodness, the strongest and the most profound is to remain evenly composed in samadhi. Nothing is more effective than remaining in the samadhi of stillness and insight, shamatha and vipashyana. When it comes to accumu lating merit, when it comes to pacifying disturbing emotions and selfishness, nothing is better than this. The Buddha often taught that, compared to making lavish offerings to all buddhas in the ten directions, or to giving alms to the needy for aeons and aeons, it is much more effective to remain in the composure of recognizing the natural state of mind, even for a very short time. This superior method eradicates personal faults and perfects the accumulations of merit and wisdom.
In the actual recognition of mind essence, or self-existing aware ness, all selfish emotions have dissolved and there is no forming of karma and disturbing emotions. Deluded perception is absent at that moment. Even if one has not recognized the natural state of mind and simply pretends to be in the natural state, it still brings incredible benefit, because it is closer to knowing how it really is. Similarly, the mere thought "All things are empty and devoid of identity," while conceptual, is still true. All things are empty and devoid of identity, and thinking this brings us closer to realizing how this is in actuality.
Where does the thought that all things are empty and devoid of identity come from? It comes from understanding, which is the re sult of study and reflection. The conviction that, "All things are empty and devoid of identity" comes about through learning and studying, which is what we are doing right now. We are learning. This is what these teachings are about; that is what this book is about. Learning is extremely important to gain understanding.
Thinking things through with our own power of reflection enables us to gain true understanding through meditation training. That is why it is said that "Learning and reflection are lamps to dispel igno rance." 
The teachings of Buddha Shakyamuni are very detailed and very extensive. There are many different topics, each with a lot of mate rial. Regardless of how much perseverance and how much intelli gence we may have, there is always more to study; the subject will not run out. We can inquire, analyze and question as much as we want, and that is perfectly all right. However, please understand this vital point: Take the teachings personally, apply them to your own situa tion. Understand that all the teachings are personal instructions, and that they are without conflict. This is essential, because if we do not take the teachings personally, if we do not take them to heart, we may think they are simply information. With that attitude, we keep on gathering information, lining up one point of view or philosophy against another. We end up sharpening our discriminating intellect and becoming increasingly judgmental, trying to defeat other posi tions. We may think we are promoting the true Dharma, while in fact we are promoting aversion and attachment. Whatever we learn, we should use it to reduce our own selfishness. Learning is the remedy against disturbing emotions- that is what it is meant for. It's just like the way that medicine is meant for curing disease. Any medicine that can cure disease is authentic medicine; it is useful; it can be ef fective. But any medicine that does not work, no matter how expen sive it might be, is no good; it is to be avoided.
In short, whatever we learn and whatever we understand, we should put to use to improve our mind, our attitude. Otherwise, we are merely learning something by rote. We listen, we hear it, we un derstand it, and we may be able to repeat it in the same way - so what! The whole reason the Buddha taught was so that the teach ings could cure our selfish emotions, our rigid minds. Learning Buddhism should change our way of being, in thought, word and deed. In body, in speech and in mind we should be more loosened up, more relaxed and flexible.
In Shantideva's The Way of a Bodhisattva, there is an instruction: "When you look upon another being, do so gently, with loving eyes and a smiling face." Appreciate other beings with this attitude: "With the help of these beings, I can develop the precious enlightened attitude, bodhichitta. With the help of these beings, I can pro gress towards Buddhahood. The fact that it is possible for me to train in the six paramitas, in the four means of magnetizing and so forth, and in the vast activities of a bodhisattva, is only possible because of other beings - so, thank you very much!" The teaching of The Way of a Bodhisattva continues, "Speak gently; speak softly; speak meaningfully. In your heart be free of conceit and hypocrisy, be free of rivalry and aggression. Always keep a sincere and compas sionate frame of mind." 
When we study the words of the Buddha and understand their meaning, something should change in us. A person who learns and reflects about Buddhism should simultaneously diminish his or her involvement in selfish emotions. Compassion and understanding should grow further and further. If that is the case, you can say that learning and understanding are progressing correctly.
On the other hand, as we continue studying more and more Dharma, if our character becomes increasingly rigid, if we become increasingly rude and unkind, something is wrong. There is the risk that one can become insensitive, numb, unless one takes the teachings personally. A great sinner, someone who has been extremely evil, can still be changed by the Dharma. But someone who has learned a lot yet who has not taken it to heart, someone who has become very insensitive, is very hard to change through the Dharma. Do not keep your understanding of the Dharma as merely intellectual information. Bring it into your experience, assimilate and train in it. Otherwise we can end up gathering more and more information, yet using the teachings to inflate ourselves with egotistical aims, while increasing our attachment and aversion.
If you take a stone from the river and split it in half, it is still dry in the middle, even though it has spent years in the water. One may expect, "Shouldn't it be wet or saturated somehow?" In the same way, we can spend years and years in Dharma circles, but unless we make the teachings our experience through practice, it is like being that stone from the riverbed, still dry at the core. There is a Tibetan saying: "The Dharma-professional is not helped by the Dharma, just like the butter skin is not softened by the butter." Usually a piece of hide or skin is softened by applying oil or butter and kneading it so that it becomes really flexible. In Tibet, butter is kept in skins. That skin spends all its time with the butter- it becomes saturated with the butter - yet it grows totally stiff and rigid because it hasn't been properly kneaded or worked. It's the same with the need to apply Dharma teachings; we need to work them, knead them into our being.
While there are so many things we could study within Buddhist teachings, the essential point at any time is to be certain about what you learn, and then to use it, to apply it. In particular, we need to become clear about the nature of mind by means of the 'perfect measure' of the Buddha's words. 'Measure' here refers to the perfect way of becoming certain. There is the perfect measure of the Buddha's words, the perfect measure of your own intelligence and the perfect measure of the pith instructions of your personal teacher. Combine these three and gain confidence about the natural state of mind.
All of samsara and all of nirvana is simply the magic of your own mind. All joys, all sorrows, and everything to be affirmed or denied at the path stage- all this is made by our minds. It is the mind's doing: all is dependent upon mind, experienced by mind, and made by mind. Mind is the doer of all, the maker of all. The purpose of all philosophy and practice is to soften this mind. The essence of our mind is the Buddha, the awakened state. It is through not recog nizing it that all problems arise, like a poor man who does not know that a stone set in the fireplace of his own house is actually made of pure gold, and thus continues to starve. The wish-fulfilling jewel of our mind essence has always been present, primordially, as our own nature. Not knowing this, our trouble continues. In short, all the suffering we have undergone is because of not recognizing the nature of our mind.
We spin through samsara because of ignorance. Ignorance means not knowing - not knowing the natural state. Sentient beings are confused through not knowing the natural state. What we need now, instead of not knowing, is to know. This knowing is called 'seeing the nature of mind.' Knowing the natural state is called 'buddha'. Not knowing the natural state is called 'sentient being'. When knowing the natural state, we are free, liberated. When not knowing the natural state we are deluded, confused.
The natural state in itself is unmistaken and unconfused. The natural state, our basic being, is not created by the Buddha; it is not an invention. In fact, even the Buddha is unable to make it. Even a buddha cannot construct it, so how can we? If the Buddha had somehow created it, it would not be that great. What is made is not natural. Our basic state is not made up in any way whatsoever; it is not created by anyone. Whether or not a Buddha appears in this world, and whether or not the Buddha describes it through teachings, our basic state, the natural state, still remains exacdy the same. The cleverest buddha cannot improve it. The stupidest, most dense sentient being cannot worsen it. Knowing the natural state, how the basic condition actually is, is called seeing the innate nature - seeing dharmata. This 'seeing' does not mean to see a concrete thing. It is also not to see an inconcrete thing. It is the seeing which is totally free of any kind of formulation. Thoughts like 'it is,' 'it is not,' 'it's concrete,' 'it's inconcrete'- it is utterly free of all that. Concrete is defined as the opposite of inconcrete, and thus it is dependent formulation.
How much do we need to learn? We need to continue learning until we have complete confidence about the natural state; then it is enough. We can use any kind of method to do so. Whatever helps is fine - use it. Whatever does not help - give that up. Use whatever is beneficial; give up whatever is a hindrance. Continue until you reach what you set out to do; that is the purpose oflearning.
To realize the innate nature is to know it through direct experi ence, not just intellectually. The moment of direct knowing in actual experience is not something we learn about or have heard of. That moment you feel sure and decide, "This is the natural state" - that is the proof that your understanding is no longer theory. You are not an intellectual anymore.
Any other questions? 
STUDENT: You said that when we are certain we've experienced the natural state of mind, we can study or do whatever we like. At the moment when we are experiencing that, there is nothing to do. The comment of, "Oh, that is it" - that feels like a thought that comes later. That, "Oh, a moment ago that must have been the natural state" seems like thinking, thinking "Oh yeah, that's what we've been talking about." 
RINPOCHE: That is fine. There is a difference between the medita tion state and postmeditation. During the meditation state, when we remain composed in the unconfined unity of empty cognizance, there should not be any thought of, "Now I see it, now I experience it." Mterwards, however, we may reflect on how the experience was. We are able to appreciate that it was an experience in which there was no concrete thing being dwelled on as the experience. That would be called postmeditation.
There are different ways to define meditation and postmedita tion, but basically, whenever there is thinking, it is postmeditation.
By recognizing the nature of the thinker, the thinking dissolves. When the thinking dissolves, that is the meditation state. When thinking reoccurs, it is postmeditation. Generally speaking, when you sit the body down with a straight back and keep sitting, you call it meditation. When you stand up, it is postmeditation. The practitioner who trains in the natural state of mind essence, initially trains while sitting down, but then at some point he or she trains while involved in other activities. So really, no one but yourself knows whether you are in meditation or postmeditation. 
The essence of all teachings in Dzogchen is called rigpa, or in Mahamudra, ordinary mind. It is our natural state, unpolluted by any conceptual attitude. That means we recognize in actuality, not as an idea. It needs to be the natural state laid totally bare, stripped of any conceptual frame of mind. Otherwise, our training is merely a training in the idea of it. We may tell ourselves that our present experience corresponds to what we read in a book or what we heard. "Yes, mind is empty" - that is one thought. "It is also cognizant" - that is a second thought. "They are a unity," is a third thought. "Oh, this is emptiness, this is simplicity. Yeah, this is an absence of con structs, this is mental nondoing." Forming those thoughts is simply mental doing! Any such way in which we try to sit and formulate the natural state is nothing other than an imitation, not the real thing. It cannot be anything other than that. 
On the other hand, words like rigpa or ordinary mind point at the natural state by describing how our nature already is. It is not something we make, not something we construct or something that we do. It is how our basic state is when not doing anything to it whatsoever. When we do not try to contrive or form it into anything at all, it is already rigpa, ordinary mind. That is why Milarepa teasingly said, "The Buddha's tongue is eloquent when describing the general vehicles, but gets stuck when teaching the definitive mean- . mg. " 
In other words, the ultimate state is ineffable, indescribable. At the same time, it is very hard to realize the meaning without some description. But we need to remember that the descriptions are only methods. Any description, no matter how brilliant, is never one hundred percent accurate. It cannot be, by its very nature. When you hear that all phenomena are beyond constructs, that essentially all phenomena neither exist nor do not exist, both or neither, you try to understand it and think, "Well yes, that is how it is." Yet that is still only a formulation. The moment you think "Beyond constructs," that itself is a construct! That is the trouble with words. Still, if we never say that all things are beyond constructs, we are in bigger trouble. 
If we grasp the thought and cling to the words, the actuality of the meaning escapes us. "Everything is emptiness beyond constructs" - to hold that thought is still clinging. When we cling to an I, it is clinging. To fixate on egolessness is also clinging. To say "There is no ego" is still fixation. You can fixate on something as being, or as not being, but both are fixation. The knowledge in which egolessness is an actuality is not just knowledge; it is transcendent knowledge beyond holding any notion of the three spheres. 
STUDENT: How do we tum away thoughts? 
RINPOCHE: The method to dispel thinking is thought-free wakeful ness. The instructions for training in the primordially pure state of Trekcho, the Thorough Cut, say, "Do not block or suppress thoughts." Since you cannot block thoughts anyway, do not even try. Allow whatever happens to happen: if a thought forms, let it form. Then the instruction is, "When a thought moves, be carefree; don't attach too much importance to it." When we don't attach any im portance to what is thought of, that thought cannot do much dam age. It cannot get a foothold; it cannot be 'solidly' formed. But if one is unable to be carefree and attaches importance to a thought, the thought is fully formed. The more importance given to a thought, Sothe stronger the thought becomes.
Take the example of an old man watching children play. The kids build houses in a sandbox, saying, "This is my castle," and think that what they made is very important. They say, "I am the owner and you are not." They build up all kinds of seriousness around the play. But the old man who is watching does not attach that much validity to it at all. He knows this is children's play, this making sandcastles- no big deal! 
In a similar way, whenever a thought moves, the more carefree and relaxed we can be about it and the less importance we attach to it, the easier it is to arrive back into the natural state of rigpa. On the other hand, the more importance we attach to what is being thought of, the more it obscures the awakened state of rigpa. There is another example often used of a small child in a temple. He looks around and he sees all the bright colors and images, but he attaches no value to what is seen. It is not that the small child is not seeing, not that he is blind, but rather that he has not formed any rigid ideas about what he sees. During our practice, it is not that we don't have ideas or thoughts; rather, it's that we don't cling to them, solidify them and make them rigid.
RELEASE
GENERALLY SPEAKING, it is the tradition to first introduce the meditator to shamatha practice, the training in stillness. Having attained some stability in that, he or she then proceeds to being pointed out the state of vipashyana - to practice vipashyana based on shamatha. This is the sequence particularly in the Vajrayana schools called Sarma, the New Schools that include Kagyii, Sakya and Geluk. According to these traditions, shamatha is emphasized as a vital starting practice before practicing vipashyana. Without a calm mind, it's difficult to see one's own nature clearly, just as it's difficult to see one's own face clearly in the surface of a lake that is disturbed by waves. 
According to the Old or Nyingma School of the early transla tions, shamatha practice is necessary, but not that necessary. All schools make the distinction between dualistic mind and buddha nature, rigpa. Shamatha practice is to reduce the force of dualistic mind, and as dualistic mind lessens and becomes weaker, buddha nature becomes increasingly evident, obvious and manifest. 
Often in the Nyingma tradition, rigpa and dualistic mind are separated from the very beginning and one focuses on training in rigpa. For some students, it is very convenient to immediately sepa rate dualistic mind and rigpa, and to begin by training in nondual awareness. If they are able to do so, they can progress in that way. For other students it is not so suitable, it does not seem so easy to differentiate between dualistic mind and rigpa. For this type of student, it is more realistic to follow the gradual system. For this and many other reasons, it is good to have both traditions, Sarma and Nyingma. Different types of students require different types of practice. 
Within the Sarma tradition, as followed by the Kagyii schools, Mahamudra is described in terms of the twelve aspects of the four yogas. It is known as the path of liberation. This Mahamudra path is a gradual path, moving through progressive stages, beginning with one-pointedness and proceeding into simplicity, one taste, and finally to nonmeditation. I will explain these in more detail later in the book. Right now I'd just like to note that at the final level of nonmeditation, the two obscurations and their habitual tendencies are totally finished, dissolved. The two aspects of sublime knowledge have been perfected from within. This is complete buddhahood, true and complete enlightenment, the great realization of Vajradhara. Ifthe student is devoted, intelligent and has very strong perseverance, it is possible to reach this level within this very lifetime, or, if not, then at the moment of death, or in the bardo. At the very least, one will reach it within three or six lifetimes, by reconnecting with the teachings and a qualified master. When one has not damaged one's samayas (another subject I will discuss later), then liberation is definitely possible. 
Now let's briefly discuss death and the bardo. It is easier to be liberated at the moment of death and in the bardo, because we are not tied down to the body. Unfortunately, it is also easier to be confused at this time, because anxiety, hope and fear are more earnest. In the bardo state, consciousness experiences fear a hundred times more intensely than the same fear experienced while alive. Likewise, the hope and the yearning are a hundred times more in tense during the bardo. 
Right now, our minds are encased within a physical body, which you could say weighs down or anchors the spirit. The moment that mind and matter separate, the moment the spirit leaves the body, mind is much lighter. Because it is unfettered by the physical chains of a body, it may also be much more paranoid, much more suscepti ble to being influenced by any thought that arises. Sometimes it's described as being like a feather blown in a strong wind. When the mind is released from the body, one has only to think of a place, and simultaneously one arrives at it. 
Therefore, it is definitely helpful and extremely important that we train right now, in this very lifetime, so that we can help our selves when we come to the moment of dying or being in the bardo. Dharma practice definitely does help at death. We should fully un derstand the meaning of this; why and how it helps. Liberation at the moment of death does not only mean you've done virtuous deeds, so you bring along the good karma when you die. It's not like you carry your good and bad karma into the bardo, like the black and white contents of a bag. If we die deluded, we bring along that delusion. We need to be free of a confused state of mind. 
The vital point in being able to be liberated at the moment of death and in the bardo is knowing how to be free. We need to train in being liberated right now, while we are still alive. The meditation manuals describe a measure, a test through which we can assess the degree of stability we've reached. During the dream state, first become aware that you are in the dream state. If you are then able to recognize the nature of mind and sustain it for as long as it takes to flap a long Tibetan sleeve seven times, you will also be able to be liberated in the bardo state. The most important point here is to train while we are still alive and are awake, then check your progress in the dream state. Compared to the waking state, we have less control over dreams.; however, compared to dreaming, we have even less control in the bardo states. 
Of course, it is best if we can train in a way that we make pro gress, receive more teachings, practice them, and check the degree of progress during our dreams, so that when we die, we will be liber ated at that time or in the bardo. Otherwise, it is not very sure whether we actually will be free. Wouldn't it be much better to be a hundred percent sure right now? How wonderful to be totally fear less in the face of death, because of having reached stability in prac tice right now! 
It is not easy to recognize the nature of mind. But it is much more difficult to attain stability. It is not easy to sustain a noble quality continuously. It is much easier to be selfish or negative all the time. This is not only true for states of mind: it is the same with material things or animals. Special good animals are very rare and difficult to keep, but unpleasant insects are abundant, very common! Similarly, an object that is very beautiful and very rare is hard to obtain and hard to keep, while lousy things are easy to get.
The nature of mind is like a wish-fulfilling jewel: it is the bud dha, the awakened state. To recognize it in actuality and then to sustain the continuity of that is very important. It is not anybody other than ourselves who prevents us from recognizing our natural face, the real buddha. We can label that which prevents us with re ligious terms like bad karma or disturbing emotions - we can pass the blame with those words. But actions and emotions are merely names, labels made by our thoughts. That which prevents us from being face to face with the real buddha, the natural state of mind, is our own thinking. It seems to block the natural state. This thinking can be of many types. There are the bad types, which are the selfish emotions and thoughts and so forth. Then there are the good types, the virtuous emotions and thoughts. There are the neutral thoughts. The bottom line is that all three of these are thoughts. When it comes to obscuring our innate nature, it is not only evil thoughts that obscure our true nature: good and neutral thoughts obscure it just as well. 
No matter what way one clings or is attached, it is still clinging, it is still attachment. When a wealthy person is attached to his treasure chest of money, that is attachment. When a poor person is attached to his walking stick and begging bowl, it is still attachment. Clinging and attachment does not depend on the price of the object, nor on its beauty. Attachment or clinging is an attitude, a mental atti tude. 
We need to understand very precisely that it is not only evil or neutral thoughts that obscure innate suchness, our buddha nature, but that good, wholesome thoughts obscure it as well. Innate such ness is obscured by holding any type of concept - basically, by having a conceptual attitude towards something. The great bodhi sattva Manjushri said, "The one who cling lacks the true view." If there is any clinging in one's mind, the true view is not present, because every conceptual stance seems to cover and occupy the innate such ness. Here's another way of saying the same thing: "Mahamudra is mental nondoing." When nothing is done in the mind, when no con ceptual attitude is kept or retained, that is Mahamudra. 
Whether you use the teachings from the sutras or the tantras, the three vehicles or the nine vehicles, all agree on one point: the cling ing to personal identity, a conceptual attitude, needs to be dissolved, left behind. The moment you are free from mental doing, at that same moment, the nature of mind which is the unity of empty cog nizance is present, right there. The Dzogchen teachings describe the view as kadag Trekcho. Kadag means primordial purity, Trekcho means thoroughly cut through. The meditation is /hundrub Toga/. Lhundrub is spontaneous presence, Togal is direct crossing. 
The trek in Trekcho means thoroughly, while cha means cut through. It is not cut through a little bit, with some conceptual at titude still remaining. It means having thoroughly and completely cut through deluded experience altogether. This is the essence of Dzogchen practice: having thoroughly interrupted karma and dis turbing emotions, deluded experience and concepts. It is the recog nition of the moment in which the stream of thinking has been sev ered - when the past thought has ceased, the future one has not arrived and the thoughts of the present are not being formed. We cannot say exacdy how long this moment lasts for the practitioner; that is an individual matter that depends on the power of training. But in that moment of having cut through, samsaric experience is interrupted. All attachment to joy and sorrow, accepting and reject ing, hope and fear have dissolved, vanished, are no more. For that duration they are cleared away. This moment of innate suchness is endowed with tremendous qualities. 
There is perhaps a philosophical problem at this point, in that it is hard to grasp suchness intellectually. For an ordinary person, it is very easy to claim there is something. For instance, there is earth, there is water, there are stones, there are trees, there is fire - it seems very straightforward to make such a statement. For an intellectual used to making philosophical arguments, it is very easy to claim that there is nothing and to establish that logically. For a practitioner, however, the situation is different. The practitioner's experience is not the same as the solid, concrete reality that an ordinary person experiences, which has color and form and all sorts of other attributes. 
Mind is not a solid thing, but neither is it a complete nothingness like some intellectuals claim. The reality of our minds is not an issue of philosophical denial. Mind is not merely an empty space. Many in tellectual philosophers claim that everything from the aggregate of form up to and including the state of omniscience is empty and de void of true existence. However, according to the inner levels of Buddhism, "Though everything is empty, to not be empty of the kayas and wisdom is the way of the Buddha's teachings." For a philosopher, such a statement may sound as if things are not empty. This formu lation is risky. Trouble begins, and things get very complicated. People have been arguing for thousands of years about the right way of articulating ultimate reality, and they do so even today. 
The reason for the problem is mental habits are so strong. Whenever we hear that something is, we nail it to being just that way. When something is not, it is just that. We may feel that these are irreconcilable differences. However, in the statement 'there are kayas and wisdoms' their way of existing should not be understood as being the same as the usual existence of things perceived by de luded mind. The kayas and wisdoms do not exist in the same way as we do, or as things apparently do from the perspective of the con ceptual mind. 
When we hear the statement that there is nothing, it seems like this doesn't ring true either, because things do exist in our experi ence. We use our habitual experience as the basic measure for what is and what is not. This is entirely understandable. But how can we do that, really, when our habitual experience is mistaken, deluded? What really decides everything? "Me. It is my mind which is im portant." But how can mind, which is caught up in karma and dis turbing emotions, decide what is real? 
Instead, again and again compose your mind in the view of Mahamudra or Dzogchen, and train in that. By repeating the recog nition of innate suchness, totally free of mental constructs, we lay the basisfor accomplishing the mind of the buddhas. Free from delusion, karma and emotions, this practice is the training in realizing dharmakaya. The development stage practices, including visualizations and recita tions, are training in accomplishing sambhogakaya. When we make pure aspirations to benefit others in a boundless way, whether it's in our home, in a holy place, or in front of a sacred representation, we are training in actualizing nirmanakaya, at this very moment. We make the strong wish that "At some point may I be able to emanate as many replicas of bodhisattvas as there are atoms in the universe, each of which accomplishes the benefit ofbeings." In the future, out of great compassion, this sincere wish to benefit others will form the basis for the ability to manifest the nirmanakayas. 
Let us train in realizing dharmakaya, the mind of the buddhas. Please compose your minds in the state free from involvement in past, present and future. There is no duality to be kept here, no split between meditator and meditation object. Still, since we have five senses, we are in the habit of making thoughts about what we perceive. When practicing, we try to be in a way that is not like usual samsara; we try to turn away from that. The samsaric way is to im mediately become involved in what we think of, and to hold that very firmly and solidly in mind. We try not to be in that way, to not hold onto what is perceived. 
My father, Kyabje Tulku Urgyen Rinpoche, gave one simple in struction known as the pointing-out instruction. He showed how to disconnect from clinging to what is perceived. What usually happens is that our six senses, particularly sight, follow after perceived ob jects. The mind, our attention, looks and makes a thought of what is seen, and we get stuck in that thought, and are unable to be free. That is the samsaric way. The pith instruction is a method for how to release that, how to be free, how to not cling. Leave the five sense wide open but not engaged, not involved in holding the sense ob jects. Recognizing mind nature is called taking your natural seat, the natural seat of nondual awareness. The moment attention is caught up in what is perceived, the natural seat is lost. Your awareness loses its natural seat, its innate stability when attention gets caught through the five senses and apprehends a sense object. We need to let be in the way that is utterly empty, utterly naked and wide open. 
Release your awareness undirected, 
Into wide openness. 
Such ordinary mind, 
Such original wakefulness is always in us. 
It is our basic state. 
We have never been apart from it for even an instant. 
Though our innate nature is never apart from us, 
For even an instant, 
Our conceptual thinking obscures it. 
Understand that dualistic thought obscures. 
Now we must use a method to remove this obscuring habit. 
We must clear it up. 
Since original wakefulness is never apart from us, 
And has never been so, for even a single instant, 
The moment dualistic thinking dissolves, 
The buddha is discovered from within. 
This is why we can be enlightened. 
This is why we have the readiness to awaken. 
This is why our natural state, 
Our original mind, 
Can be discovered from within.
The moment the clinging dissolves. 
This is what we call buddha nature. 
There are many types of philosophy, truth-seeking pos1t10ns about what is. Buddhist philosophy has one special quality: that the awakened state is within, and we are in a state of readiness; it is ready to be discovered. It is said in a scripture, "All sentient beings are buddhas, but they are covered by temporary obscurations." Every sentient being has as their nature original wakefulness - what in the general teachings is called buddha nature. Because of possessing this original mind, the buddha potential, everyone can be enlightened. Everyone is allowed to be a buddha; everyone has that ability, that readiness. 
If you squeeze sand, you will never get oil, because sand does not have an oily nature. But sesame seeds have an oily nature, and you can squeeze oil out of them. Even if someone says it should not happen, it still does. It is allowed to happen; it is all right. You cannot make a prohibition against sesame seeds having an oily quality; you cannot deny it or dispute that fact - it is just like that. But it does take some effort, just a little bit of effort, a little squeeze, to release the oil. 
One could say that we as well have an oily, buttery nature rich in enlightened qualities, which can be brought forth. We have what the scriptures describe as original wakefulness, ordinary mind, the natu ral state. We need to provide the right circumstance for it to be experienced as an actuality. These circumstances are, in general, to perfect the accumulations and to purify obscurations. More particulady, after learning about how our natural state is and understanding it, we need to apply some method to recognize it and sustain the recognition. Spiritual practice is necessary. 
All of you readers, please practice well to absorb this meaning within your personal experience. One can go on endlessly talking or reading about reality, especially about how our innate nature really is. But intellectualizing it is as futile as trying to measure the sky with the span of one's arms. Our basic nature is so much bigger than the grasp of conceptual mind.
MEANS AND KNOWLEDGEWE 
SHOULD REMEMBER three extremely important principles, called the threefold excellence or three noble principles. The excellent preparation is to begin with refuge and bodhichitta. Refuge is the ninefold objects of refuge. Bodhichitta is the wish "May I realize the dharmak.aya nature to benefit all sentient beings, as infinite in number as the sky is vast." 
Next comes the excellent main part. We need to know that our natural state, the basic nature of our minds, is the buddha mind, the awakened state. It is because of failing to recognize this that we get caught up in deluded experience, create karma and disturbing emotions, and undergo the myriad types of experiences of the six classes of beings. The third part is the excellent conclusion, in which we dedicate the merit to benefit all sentient beings and make pure as pirations. 
To return to the excellent preparation, the practice of refuge and bodhichitta can be very delightful. It's possible to take refuge with a lot of appreciation, a lot of joy. It is a very sincere attitude, a very delighted attitude. In the same way, the compassionate wish to help all sentient beings without exception is also very wonderful and sincere. The attitudes of refuge and bodhichitta are basically devotion and compassion. Among all states of dualistic mind, there are no cleaner, purer, or more sincere states of dualistic mind than devotion and compas ston. 
Devotion in this context means a trust that comes through un derstanding the meaning, the ultimate purpose. Compassion is a benevolent state of mind that is impartial, free from any prejudice or limitation. Our compassion can embrace all sentient beings spinning in samsaric states, from the deepest pit of hell to the highest god realm. Among the six classes of beings who takes rebirth in the four different ways, no single sentient being in the three realms is beyond karma and disturbing emotions. When the causes of karma and disturbing emotions are present, their result, which is suffering, will ripen. Unless and until we are free ourselves, we are not able to help and liberate others. 
The devotion we feel through knowing the meaning involves an understanding of the qualities of the Three Jewels: the precious Buddha, the precious Dharma, the precious Sangha. In particular, it refers to understanding the qualities of the awakened state of buddhahood, omniscient enlightenment. These qualities and virtues of enlightenment include loving compassion, wisdom knowledge, enlightened activity, and the ability to protect and help others. These qualities are only fully available in the state ofbuddhahood. If we want to achieve these, we need to awaken to true and complete enlightenment. There is no instruction that shows us how to fully awaken to those qualities other than the sacred Dharma. Therefore, there is no way around taking support from the sublime teachings and instructions. 
Where do we receive these? We may try reading books on our own, but this alone does not really work. We need to receive the living word from spiritual guides; spiritual friends who are endowed with and embody these teachings. Reflecting like this, there is no way around taking refuge in Buddha, Dharma and Sangha. Temporarily we take refuge in the Sangha and the Dharma teachings. The ultimate object of refuge, however, is the omniscient state of buddhahood endowed with the qualities of wisdom, love and abili ties. Knowing this is called 'trust through understanding the reason.'
There are different levels of devotion. There is devotion that is admiration, devotion that is a longing or yearning, devotion that is deep trust, and devotion that is irreversible, unshakable confidence. We progress through these different levels as our understanding and experience deepen. The intellectual understanding we have that is a result of study and reflection will never be more than admiration and longing. As we gain direct personal experience, we can develop the devotion that is real trust and confidence. The final stage, unshak able or irreversible devotion, is only possible when we are totally free of doubt.
As we understand more through our studies and reflection, the teachings are seen to have authentic value, and our interest grows in a way that is sincere and without pretense. This is devotion that is admiration and longing - we yearn to be this way. The understanding that comes through our personal experience unfolds as we gain more and more of a taste within our minds. We start to notice that the teachings, when applied personally, actually do work. We notice that we are able to realize what needs to be realized. We are able to manifest in ourselves qualities of love and compassion, of sharp intelligence and renunciation. At this point, we have some confidence in the teachings based on our own experience. It is no longer intellectual information that sounds inspiring - we know from within ourselves. That is a different type of devotion: it is a devotion that displays real trust and confidence. As we grow increasingly familiar with and experience the natural state of mind, our basic nature, then this trust, this devotion can become unshakable.
We especially appreciate the source from where we received the teachings. We received them from our own teachers and masters, who are the holders of a living lineage. Therefore, there is a lot of appreciation of and trust in the source of the teachings - not just our personal teacher, but all the masters of the lineage. In particular, the source of all the teachings is Buddha Shakyamuni, the fourth guide in this aeon. It is from him that all the different lines of transmission stem. We begin to have a trust and confidence fromthe very core of our being in the Buddha of our time.
The activity of the Buddha is beyond the reach of normal thought: it is unfathomable. The representative of the Buddha's ac tivity is present today in a way that we can connect with, in the form of the teachings. This sacred Dharma is the Buddha's modern-day representative. It instructs us on how to rid ourselves of all short comings and faults and how to make the enlightened qualities blos som. The Buddha was able to perform great miracles through his body, speech, and mind. His clairvoyant powers manifested in many different ways. But the greatest miracle the Buddha performed was that of teaching the Dharma. The words of the Buddha are in har mony with the nature of things, without any conflict with how things really are. It is perfectly all right for us to have a critical atti tude towards the Dharma, to examine and analyze whether or not these teachings are true. It is also perfectly all right for us to test out the teachings within ourselves to see whether they actually work. We should try to see whether we can prove the Buddha's teachings; whether we can endeavor to become freer of shortcomings and gain greater good qualities. In this way, we discover that the words of the Buddha are totally free of fault and are endowed with all good qualities.
All the teachings of the Buddha can be condensed into just two points: means and knowledge. You can say that means are relative goodness. Knowledge is the view of emptiness. Until we allow our conceptual attitude to fully dissolve, there is good as well as negative karma, and there are past and future lives. If we do good, there is a good result; if we do evil, there is an unpleasant result. As long as this conceptual attitude has not been released, time does not vanish; there is a yesterday; there will be a tomorrow. Therefore time does seem to exist - there is moment after moment, like right now. In a more general way, one day follows after another - yesterday, today and tomor row. Expanding the picture still further, there is lifetime after life time. 
In reality, however, time is just a construct: it cannot be found to exist. No matter how much we examine, we cannot pinpoint it. The fact we are unable to identify or nail down time does not mean that we are incapable. It means that time is intangible, insubstantial. Time is not a concrete thing that can be found anywhere. Time never had a real existence. Time comes about only because of the thought that thinks that there is time; it is a creation of thought. It is the same way with solid matter, with material substance. Substance only seems substantial because one thinks it is. Both time and matter from the vety first do not possess any real existence. The basis for all the world's strife, all these problems, all these arguments, does not really exist! But believing that it does, one sincerely and whole heartedly gets involved in them. 
Unless our present conceptual attitude dissolves, samsara does not vanish. Unless our present conceptual attitude dissolves, selfish emotions do not vanish. Unless our present conceptual attitude dis solves, ego-oriented clinging does not vanish. The moment the pre sent conceptual attitude dissolves, there is no karma and there are no disturbing emotions. When the present conceptual attitude vanishes, there is no forming of karma. In the recognition of the true view, there is no karma- it is beyond karma. Another way of putting this is to say that in the absence of the conceptual state of mind, there is no further creation of karma. The moment that mind ftxates or holds onto a conceptual attitude, karma and disturbing emotions are formed right there and then. On the other hand, the vety moment that the conceptual frame of mind dissolves, there is no making of karma- there is no forming of disturbing emotions or selfish atti tudes. The hair of concept cannot remain in the flame of original wake fulness. 
Among means and knowledge in the general Buddhist teachings, means is to avoid evil and do good. Goodness with concept, with focus, is called conditioned or relative goodness, and it accumulates merit. From the moment we wake up until the moment we fall asleep, we should try to notice what attitude we have. At any given moment during the day, we should try to be more aware and mindful of how we actually are. Whenever we notice we are being nega tive, unkind, or outright mean, we should try to change that as much as we can, as often as possible. We should try to change even the slightest negative attitude. Similarly, when we notice that we have a good heart, a noble and pure attitude, a loving and compassionate way of being, we should try to expand it to embrace an even larger amount of beings, until it becomes very, very vast. Train in this as often as possible, even in the smallest way. This is the practice of conditioned goodness, and it is always to be adopted and trained in. 
People think, "I have no time to practice." This is not true - we do have time to practice. In every situation we can try to be kinder or better in our actions, words and attitude. That training is Dharma practice. The opposite of that is to be selfishly involved in the negative emotions that seem to happen spontaneously, but that in fact arises out of habit. It is necessary to be on guard. We should not confuse what should be accepted with what should be rejected. 
This thinking mind of ours is something hidden; it is not always so evident how it is. It is sometimes downright nasty. It can be very naughty, in that it does not listen. We may think we are nice, and are not. We may try to be good, and it seems that we cannot. This nasty mind needs to be changed into being gentle. The nastier one is in one's actions, the stronger or more intense the karma being created. The more noble-minded we can become, the stronger the noble-mindedness or the goodness we experience, the stronger the good karma being created. 
At all times and in all situations, be on guard; notice how your state of mind is. This mind, our attitude, is the most vital, the most crucial point. What we say and how we behave physically is secon dary to this. Body and speech are the servants of mind. We need to train this mind, this attitude, and the way to do so is to begin with refuge and bodhichitta, to bring these two attitudes to mind: taking refuge and forming the bodhisattva resolve. That conditioned goodness which accumulates merit is called the accumulation of merit. 
To review again, the main part of the practice free of reference point means allowing ourselves to be totally free of conceptual atti tude. To be empty and vividly awake - that is the accumulation of wisdom. 
The final goodness is to conclude the session with dedicating the merit to all sentient beings, which is again the accumulatipn of merit. In this way, all our practice will be carried out within the framework of the two accumulations. Through this practice, we perfect the two accumulations. It is often said: "As the ground, recognize the unity of the two truths. As the path, carry out the unity of the two liberations. As the fruition, realize the unity of the two kayas." 
As the ground, recognize the unity of the two truths: the two truths are that everything experienced, everything perceived, is devoid of true existence. Yet, you cannot deny that that experience unfolds. It does so unobstructedly. At the same time it possesses no concrete existence whatsoever. Experience appears, while being empty. This indivisibility of experience and emptiness is the unity of the two truths. 
The path is the unity of the two accumulations: the accumulation of merit and wisdom, with and without conceptual focus or reference point. The fruition is the unity of the kayas: dharmakaya and rupakaya. The more we understand ground as being the unity of the two truths, the easier it is to train in the path, which is the unity of the two accumulations. The more we train in the path as the unity of the two accumulations, the closer we are to realizing the fruition, the unity of the two kayas. 
In another way, we can say that means is compassion while knowledge is emptiness. Through compassion we automatically em brace what is good and avoid evil. The compassionate frame of mind spontaneously refrains from causing harm to others; we do what is beneficial and helpful. Compassion is the source of all goodness. Its op posite, selfishness, is deluded and the real meaning of evil. The most eminent of all types of knowledge is the knowledge that cuts the very root of samsaric existence, that completely ends samsara. This is the knowledge that realizes egolessness, also known as the profound view of emptiness. In short, emptiness suffused with compassion is the very heart of Buddhist practice. And it is through the unity of these two, the unity of emptiness and compassion, that we can cut through the very root of all disturbing emotions. In terms of the two accumulations, the accumulation of merit is with focus, the accu mulation of wisdom is beyond focus. In terms of the path, our training in compassion and the view of emptiness naturally perfects the two accumulations. To condense this teaching even further, in the moment of recognizing the nature of our minds as the unformed unity of empty cognizance, the view of emptiness and impartial compassion are naturally present. 
As we train further and further in recognizing the empty and cognizant nature of our minds, the compassionate means and the knowledge of emptiness becomes clearer, stronger and further and further developed. This is the knowledge that is free of holding concepts and the compassion that is beyond partiality. It is often said that in the moment of having a deep-felt sense of compassion aris ing from the core of your heart, you are much closer to knowing emptiness. To quote the third Karmapa: "In the moment of love, the empty essence dawns nakedly." 
To truly manifest what is good and to avoid evil, we need to be compassionate - there is no way around this. If we want to lead all beings towards enlightenment, we need to be compassionate. In fact, all buddha qualities spring out of compassion. The knowledge of emptiness ensures that we go beyond samsaric existence, but com passion guarantees that we do not remain passively in the state of nirvana. Compassion makes us engage in infinite enlightened ac tivities for the sake of all sentient beings. There is a famous state ment: "Not straying into samsara, not abiding in nirvana: that is done through knowledge and compassion." 
When it comes to personally practicing this, we need some re minder. This reminder is called mindfulness or presence of mind. At the beginning stage it might be the thought: "Now I'd better recog nize the nature of mind." Yes, this is conceptual, it is a thought - but it is a necessary reminder. Someone who does not usually recog nize nature of mind and is not in the habit of doing so needs to be mindful, needs a deliberate reminder. We need to deliberately re mind ourselves to recognize the nature of mind, or else it will not just happen. 
It is difficult for a beginner to mingle the practice with the ac tivities of daily life. This is because one is not in the habit of re minding oneself to recognize the nature of mind. And that is why it is necessary to do a practice session, to make a time where one does just that - like a short retreat. Sessions and retreat are very impor tant. In a session one trains. In a meditation session, our involve ment in distraction, busyness, being carried away, is much less. 
On a more practical level, we still become distracted during ses sions, of course. This distraction can take the form of either agita tion or dullness. Dullness is a form of laziness, when we do not bother to realize that we are half-asleep. When we are distracted, whether agitated or dull, we have gone away from the practice; we have left the training. Agitation and dullness are the two enemies of meditation practice. When agitated or dull, we are unable to recog nize the natural face of samadhi, of stillness and insight, shamatha and vipashyana. It is through the reminder or 'remindfulness' that we are again able to sustain the essence of unified empty cognizance. The real training is in the nonclinging unity of empty cognizance. The moment the mind starts to cling, this training is left behind. Mind fulness is simply a reminder to practice. If one just stays mindful in a dualistic sense, one has still not arrived at the real practice. 
When we first began to write the alphabet we had to pay close attention and put all our energy into forming each letter. Now we do not have to think much about it at all, do we? In the beginning, though, if you were not careful about the shape and size of the letters the position of your hand, the writing became awful - unclear, mistaken. As we became trained in writing, we could write the right shape, with the right alignment. Our writing became unmistaken. Each character on a line can now bring forth its power and meaning, clearly and distincdy. Where did this ability to write in such a way come from? Without training, it could not possibly have happened. Our writing potential has manifested because of our training. We are now accomplished in writing. 
It's important to acknowledge that in the beginning, we needed effort. We applied effort, put our hand to work, trained repeatedly, and now we do not need so much effort. Our writing is now practi cally effortless. It's the same when we learned to read. At first, we distinguished each character in order not to confuse it. In the begin ning, when you looked at the letter and tried to read, you could not pronounce it. Even when you pronounced it, you still could not read. Now that you are fully trained in reading, you do not have to think about which character is A and which is B - you simply read, like the flow of a river. This is a good example for the need to train in order to transcend deliberate effort. 
At the beginning stage, we need a deliberate reminder. With a certain degree of mindful energy, we can do well at what we are doing. As we continue training, we do not need to use so much force. Effort is necessary when we are not proficient. Right now, we are not fully trained in being the nonclinging unity of empty cognizance. To begin this training we need to remind ourselves deliber ately. As we apply this deliberate reminding again and again in order to recognize our basic state, we become increasingly trained, and the need for the deliberate reminding becomes less and less. At some point, we are so used to it that there is no more need to apply delib erate reminding. This is not a new chapter or a new state; it comes totally naturally. It is not like we say, "In the past I was practicing deliberate mindfulness, and now I am going to shift over to effort less mindfulness. I am opening a new chapter in my practice!" It doesn't happen like this at all. If you could do this, fine! But does it really happen by just intending? It is more a natural process that arises spontaneously as the need for deliberately reminding ourselves becomes less and less and less. The need simply falls away. 
The Mahamudra instructions have many short phrases that sum up the essence of meditation advice. These are very precious in structions. One is: "The better reminding, the better the training." This means that the more often you deliberately remind yourself to rec ognize your nature, the better the practice becomes. Another one says "The more thoughts, the more dharmakaya." This does not means giving into ordinary thought involvement, but rather recogni zing the state of thought-free wakefulness for each thought. This type of practice - "the more thoughts, the more dharmakaya" - also implies "the more disturbing emotions the more wisdom." Please take care to understand the subdety of this point.
What is it that brings us face to face with the natural state? At the beginning, it is a deliberate reminding. Later, it is effordess re minding. Later still, after having trained further and further and be come stable, any thought movement becomes the 'adornment of awareness', no longer the adornment of clinging blindly. Any movement of thought automatically becomes that which introduces us again to the natural state. When each movement of thought, by itself, does not trigger any involvement in ordinary thinking, but in stead becomes the state of thought-free wakefulness, then you have reached quite a high level of practice. You are beyond one-pointed ness, beyond simplicity, and beyond the lesser and medium stage of one-taste. You can almost say it is the higher stage of one-taste in Mahamudra. Then only nonmeditation is left, the dharmakaya throne of nonmeditation. 
It is like this with everything we learn: in the beginning it is difficult, and later it becomes easier and easier, until it is completely easy. Please understand this point very well: in our present situation it is the training in deliberate reminding that allows us to sustain the continuity of buddha mind. 
This reminding is in general Buddhism called mindfulness. The same word is used. It is considered very important because mindful ness is very important. But its function in Dwgchen and Maha mudra is different. The general role of mindfulness is to remember to avoid misdeeds and to remind oneself to do what is wholesome. In terms of shamatha practice, to be mindful means to remember to apply the method of stillness, to compose your attention in a calm way. It is said, "From moment to moment don't lose mindfulness." Haven't you heard that phrase often? That kind of mindfulness is conceptual. In other words, keep noticing. The watcher is needed to keep watch, to keep asking "What is happening?" This is also good for another type of practice. The mindfulness I am talking about here means there is one moment of reminding. In the next moment, the watcher, the noticing, is dropped and allowed to dissolve. 
Otherwise, if the act of noticing is held onto, it becomes conceptual. It becomes a way of formulating what is. Unless this notion of 'keeping mindful' is dissolved, there is no real seeing of emptiness. Without dissolving the notion, you do not realize egolessness. Without dissolving the notion, the conceptual attitude, you are too occupied to see the unity of empty cognizance, the nature of mind. The nature of mind is the nonclinging unity of empty cognizance. When this notion is held in mind, it becomes an empty cognizance that clings. To summarize, the very moment any type of conceptual attitude, any type of notion is allowed to dissolve so that you are free of it - at that same moment you have arrived at the innate nature of buddha mind.
SMALL FREEDOM 
AS SOON AS OUR TEACHER, the incomparable Buddha Shakyamuni, had awakened to true and complete enlightenment at the Vajra Throne in Bodhgaya, he uttered four lines: 
I have discovered a nectar-like truth, 
Deep, calm and simple, lucidly awake and unformed. 
To whomever I explain, no one will understand; 
So I will remain silent in the jungle. 
With these few words, the Buddha expressed that not only had he recognized and trained in this recognition, he had attained com plete stability in the realization of the nature of mind. There is nothing more profound than this. The realization of the nature of mind is totally unperturbed by any movement of disturbing emo tions, like the surface of a huge ocean which is absolutely tranquil, unruffled by any movement of waves. In the same way, this state refers to the perfection of shamatha, or complete stillness. But also, it is simplicity, free from any mental constructs, totally uncon structed. That is another word for the view of emptiness, emptiness beyond constructs, which is exacdy the intent of the second turning of the Wheel of Dharma on the absence of characteristics. 
The nature of mind is not merely empty. The Buddha used the term lucidly awake, iisel or luminosity, to describe it. The nature of mind is endowed with the capacity to know. There is an innate wis dom or wakefulness within this state, a perfect knowledge. It is a profound, tranquil, unconstructed, luminous wakefulness that is unformed. Everything that is formed arises and then ceases; it takes birth and vanishes again. This profound, tranquil, unconstructed, luminous wakefulness, however, does not arise and does not cease. It is beyond birth and death. 
The Buddha recognized the original state, trained in it and at tained stability. This is how he awakened to true and complete enlightenment. We ourselves need to realize and achieve this. While caught up in the dualistic habit of clinging, our basic identity still has the nature of non-clinging nonduality. The very moment the clinging to duality dissolves, the nondual, non-clinging essence is right there. Based on this small freedom, this moment of small lib eration, the vast liberation can be attained. Without having tasted and experienced the small freedom, we will not all of a sudden somehow reach the vast liberation. The small .freedom is to recognize that the very identity of the clinging, dualistic mind is a non-clinging, nondualistic state. Recognizing that basic state is itself small freedom - freedom from karma and disturbing emotion. 
The root cause of samsara, that which creates samsara, is nothing other than our disturbing emotions and thoughts. In a moment of nondual wakefulness, no thought can be formed and no thought can remain. Therefore, that moment is totally free of karma and disturbing emotions, hope and fear, accepting and rejecting. In that moment of freedom, no conceptualization is formed and none can rem am. 
Allow your mind to be in the natural state, 
The unity of being empty and cognizant. 
Not fixating on anything, 
Not forming any conceptual attitude, 
You arrive at the innate nature. 
At that moment, no negative or positive attitude is present. 
At that moment, there is no creation of either good karma or bad karma, 
There is nothing to be accepted or rejected. 
This is the natural state itself
For a short while
There is total freedom from samsara, 
Total freedom from karma and disturbing emotions. 
Even though it is so short, 
How utterly amazing! 
For a brief moment we have awakened
From the sleep of delusion. 
There is still something incomplete here, though. Because we are not used to being composed in that natural state, the continuity of our innate nature, the ongoingness of that basic space, gets lost again. What is it that kicks us out or makes us stray from the basic state? It is karma, which in this case is our ingrained habit of thinking. We are very used to forming and getting involved in thoughts. Due to this habit, we start to think again, automatically. We don't even have an idea of where that thought came from, or what hap pened. It is by the force of the habit of thinking that a thought is formed, whether it be of past, present or future. And thereby, that which obscures the innate nature is every kind of thought, any kind of thinking. A past thought involves memory: what happened, what we did, what took place. A future thought is to plan what to do, what will happen. And present thought is to form a notion of what is taking place through any of our five senses or in the field of mind. Because this mind's attention is so childish and the sense impres sions, memories and so forth are so seductive, we are very ready to be distracted, ready to be carried away. We become distracted through any of the five senses, or by inwardly becoming agitated or drowsy. All this prevents the natural state from being experienced. 
The question is: when exactly can we recognize our buddha na ture, the nature of mind? The answer is: when we are uninvolved in thoughts of the three times. When polluted by the thoughts of the three times, the state is contrived. That which contrives, modifies, or obscures the natural state is our thinking. On a coarse, obvious level it is the disturbing emotions; in a more subtle way, it is any thought that conceptualizes the three spheres. We are shrouded by the emo tional and cognitive obscurations. Being entangled in thoughts of the three times, being caught up in conceptualizing the three spheres, seems to prevent a recognition of the basic state - the reality of what is. This is called the cognitive obscuration. A buddha is someone for whom the two obscurations, as well as the habitual tendency towards them, are completely purified. 
We try to recognize the natural state, 
And for a moment or two 
we recognize How it is to be free from subJect and obJect. 
This recognition is identical in nature
With the realization of a fully awakened buddha; 
A small version of total freedom. 
The same moment, no matter how short, 
Our dualistic experience dissolves, 
It is identical with the nature of complete enlightenment. 
Being merely a small gap in dualistic fixation, 
It gives no chance for the wisdom qualities to fully manifest. 
Like a glimmer of light in the middle of a dark night, 
The light is light; it illuminates.
But being so brief, 
It does not dispel the entire night's darkness. 
The vajra vehicle of Secret Mantra takes fruition as the path. Vajrayana is a very swift path, and to make it real, to actualize it, we need to use all sorts of methods. The Vajrayana approach has great advantages, but it is also very risky. The great advantage is that through it, we can awaken to true enlightenment, either within this lifetime, at the moment of death, or in the bardo. We do so by truly recognizing the unconstructed basic nature and persevering in this training, rather than traveling a path that takes three incalculable aeons. The risk lies in failing to genuinely recognize the uncon structed basic nature and instead training in a mistaken version. 
At the very heart of Vajrayana practice is the true, correct view: we need to train in this. When the view is correct and pure, the training in that can be correct and pure, and the conduct can be correct and pure. Finally, the fruition, the result, will automatically be correct and pure. The correct view is not realized by being smart or stubbornly pushing oneself through practice. Intelligence and persever ance alone are not sufficient. It is necessary to purify one's obscura tions, to perfect the accumulations and to receive the blessings of a qualified master with the transmission of the lineage. That is how to first recognize mind essence and it is also how to progress to deeper and deeper levels. This is the entire reason why a Vajrayana practi tioner is encouraged to undertake the general and extraordinary pre liminaries, and go through the practices of development stage, reci tation and completion stage. These practices purify our obscurations and perfect the accumulations. 
Once again, as I have mentioned before, please motivate yourself with this thought: "I will realize self-existing wakefulness, the natural mind, to bring benefit to all sentient beings, as many as the sky is vast." Mter engendering the proper attitude, make the request to all enlightened masters of the lineage, "Please grant your blessings that I may be able to do so." Then, compose yourself in the state that is unpolluted by any thought of the three times. Rest in present, fresh wakefulness untainted by thoughts of past, present or future. Leave your body like a bundle of straw where the rope has been cut. Leave your voice like a sitar where the strings have been cut, and your mind like a water wheel where the inflow of water has been cut. 
Seeing the true view takes place without something seen, without a seer, and without the act of seeing. There are different traditional ways of describing the view in the sense of viewing conditioned things, viewing the unconditioned nature, and the view which is self-knowing. 'Viewing conditioned things' means observing the seeming situation, the relative truth. 'Viewing the unconditioned' means looking into the nature of things in order to gain insight. And the 'view of self-knowing' is the insight that is naturally present during the state of nonduality, which is the unity of the two truths, the unity of experience and emptiness. In any case, the true view should be without a viewer, something viewed and an act of viewing. Remain free of the three spheres. Dualistic attention and dualistic thinking are characterized as being narrowed-in, confined, limited, focused on a reference point. That is not the meditation practice according to Mahamudra and Dzogchen. We do not need to train in duality any longer - we have already done so our entire lives with out even trying. We know how that feels! I'm talking about some thing else here: a way of being that is expansive, open, free of refer ence point, free of conceptual attitude. When we set about being in a vast, open way that is free of conceptual attitude, free of reference point, keep your five senses wide open and your awareness undi rected. Do not focus outwardly, over there. Do not concentrate in here, inwardly. And do not place your attention anywhere in be tween, either. 
First, we generate the intention, "Now I will recognize my natu ral state, the unformed unity of being empty and cognizant." In the second moment, we look to see how it is. At the actual moment of seeing, dualistic thinking has dissolved. In the moment of recogniz ing, we see - we see that there is no thing to see. In the moment of seeing, it is free; free of dualistic fixation. 
Mahamudra means mental nondoing, no thing to do. In mentally doing, what is being made is samsara: one sits and makes samsara. If you want to continually create samsara, fine! Just sit and continually create more samsara; keep on doing it. As long as we continue mental doing, samsara does not cease. But the very moment that mental doing is released, samsara has been left behind, without us having gone to some other place to be free. 
In order to engage in the real practice, we must leave behind mental doing. In the very moment of being totally free of mental doing, the real state of Mahamudra is seen. We can check and see by ourselves whether or not we are recognizing the natural state. It all depends on whether or not we are still involved in mental doing, conceptual fabrication, to even a subde degree. When all mental doing has been released, dissolved, there is nothing further to do. 
It is all about our attitude. This attitude, this mind, is the creator of everything. When this mind does not judge, does not discrimi nate, does not accept or reject, does not form any dualistic notion; when it remains free, is allowed to be free, all by itself, it is simply this nature: the identity of that which thinks is dharmakaya, self existing empty cognizance. This is the innate nature. That is the moment of being unmistaken. 
This is also the reality of what is, the basic nature known as the original buddha. The primordial Buddha Samantabhadra is the self existing wakefulness that is empty and cognizant. The symbolic Samantabhadra we can see painted on a tangka or a wall in the tem ple, or it can be the buddha we see in a dream, in meditative experi ence, or even in actuality. When self-existing wakefulness is recog nized and the continuity of that recognition is ongoing, that is called meeting the real Samantabhadra. To meet the Buddha in actuality means to meet the Buddha's mind, the awakened state. Simply see ing the physical form and hearing the sounds of his voice is not meeting the real Buddha. We need to meet and experience the Bud dha's mind, which is unfabricated naturalness. Unfobricated natural ness is the awakened state. When totally free of mental doing, that itse!f is the awakened state. The thinner the layer of our involvement in mental doing, the closer we are to the Buddha's mind. When this layer is totally absent, totally free of dualistic ftxation, that itself is the real awakened state, the true buddha mind. 
In order to be like this, certain factors must be present. Right now, we are in a situation in which all these factors are present. First of all, we are human beings: we are capable, we are educated, and we can understand what is being said. Second, we are interested: we have the intelligence to discern the meaning of the words, and we want to apply this meaning. To have all these factors combined is extremely fortunate, so please rejoice in that. 
Please compose yourself in a way that is totally free of mental doing. Saraha and many other great masters spoke like this: 
In this there is nothing to be discarded, 
Nor is there anything to be added. 
When looking naturally into the natural, 
You see the natural and are free. 
The third Karmapa, Rangjung Dorje, said: 
When looking at objects, there are no objects; they are empty.
When looking at mind, there is no mind. 
When regarding objects, there are no objects; it is all mind. When regarding mind, there is no mind; it is empty of essence. He continues: 
When looking at both, there is no duality: it is liberated in itself.
May we recognize the lucidly wakiful nature of mind. 
If your state of mind is wide-open, free of hope and fear, free of conceptual attitude, that is a good way to practice. When your training feels more constricted, more narrow and aimed towards a particular focus, you need to refine the view further. A good sign that we have recognized is when the recognition of the nature of mind becomes easier the more we train. 
In short, what we need is this: a way of training in which the natural state is easy to see and easy to sustain. Whenever it is easy to see and easy to sustain, that is the proof- the indication that we are putting to use the essential instructions of the great lineage masters. When it is difficult to see, difficult to sustain, that is an indication that we need to learn more, need to understand more, resolve matters further. Together with an authentic teacher, we need to clear up our uncertainty. We do not need to be afraid of an au thentic master; we do not need to be ashamed about this. This is important. It is not enough to only have an assumption about the awakened state, to leave it as intellectual understanding. We need to have a genuine experience. And that is why a meditation master is important, because it is together with such a person that we can clear up our misunderstanding, our uncertainty. It is not enough to merely read about the natural state in books. 
Wide open, laid totally bare, utterly empty. Leave your eyes open. Do not form any thought about what is seen through the eyes. Among our five senses, we get the most involved in making thoughts about what we see. These eyeballs are very funny - we can cover them with a single fingertip, but when ·the finger is removed, we can see a vast panorama. It seems like these eyes can accommodate so much. Everything can fit in there, including that which should not. 
Remain composed in a way that is utterly empty, wide open, free from any kind of reference point. When training in this way, some times we feel drowsy and dull, while sometimes we are unsettled and agitated. When dull, the remedy is to raise your gaze and look up ward. When agitated, lower your gaze and look down, at something like a forty-five degree angle. It is alright to keep your eyes open, but don't start to form a lot of thoughts about what is seen. That is what is meant by undirected awareness. Tilopa gave Naropa instruction in how to train in this: 
Not by perceiving but by clinging one is bound, my son, 
So cut your clinging, Naropa. 
The perceiving includes objects in our field of vision. To merely see is not binding; it is the clinging to what is seen. It is the same with hearing. It is all right to hear, but clinging to the sounds is what binds. 
Once you have the received the pointing-out instruction, then it is true that the nature of mind can be seen the moment you look. In the moment of seeing, dualistic flxation has dissolved and is free. That is a small liberation. It is liberation from all types of disturbing emotions and thoughts. Being confused or being free rests on simply one thing: knowing or not knowing. Knowing the innate nature is to be free. Not knowing the innate nature is to be confused. 
In this context, the word 'looking' does not imply that there is something to look at. It is a looking that is free from both subject and object. That is very important. The word meditation does not mean that there is a meditation object. It is a meditating free from subject and object- without even an atom of meditation object, yet without even an instant of distraction. When training in that way, without meditating on as much as an atom, yet without being distracted for even as much as an instant, we will very swiftly progress through the paths and bhumis. 
Nondistraction is essential. Usually nondistraction means not to wander off from whatever you have been told. In this context, how ever, it means not being distracted from holding nothing whatsoever in mind. Not meditating on even as much as an atom, yet not wan dering off for even an instant. Our inner teacher is this presence of mind, this nondistraction. The Mahamudra teachings say, "The lesser the distraction, the better the practice." They also say, "Nondistraction is the highway of all buddhas." Nondistraction is the king of all kinds of mindfulness. 
STUDENT: What do you mean by 'the key point of mind'?
RINPOCHE: The secret of mind, the key point of mind, is so easy that it is hard to believe. It is so close that it is hard to see. The natural state is not an act of meditating. You cannot cultivate the innate nature. Any act of cultivating innate suchness in meditation practice is nothing more than a fabrication of thought. It would be a mind-made innate nature, because in such a case it is the thoughts that meditate. Rigpa is not cultivated in meditation. The awakened state is not an object of the intellect. Rigpa is beyond intellect, and concepts. It is innate suchness. We cannot really describe it very well, be cause it is not a thing that truly can be described. Although it is not something to be cultivated, we still need to grow used to it. That is why if we understand how to not meditate even as much as an atom, while, at the same time, also being totally undistracted, we very quickly become enlightened. 
Were you to hear a thousand teachings, the essence is still within these two points: undistracted while not meditating. It is easy to say but hard to apply. It may feel extremely difficult to truly experience being free of both something to be cultivated in meditation and someone who cultivates it. It is difficult because it is so simple. Nothing needs to be done there, and that is not our habit. We are used to doing, and doing requires effort. To simply be without doing anything ought to be easier. But because that is not our habit, to practice nondoing seems difficult. 
It is so close that it is hard to see. The buddha mind, which is ordi nary mind unspoiled by thoughts of the three times, is always with us. We have never been apart from it for even an instant, and yet our thinking causes it to be unnoticed. Because of being too easy, we do not trust. Because of being too close, we do not see. The view of Mahamudra, the view of Dzogchen, the view of the Middle Way, can be ex plained for months upon months in great detail. But when con densing these to the very essence, it is like this: not meditating or cultivating on as much as an atom, while at the same time not being distracted for even an instant.
RENUNCIATION 
To REVIEW A BIT, the teachings of the Buddha that enable us to proceed towards liberation and enlightenment are, generally speaking, first the shamatha practice of being calm, being quiet, and next the vipashyana training of seeing clearly, which is thought-free wakefulness. In the context of this book, the latter involves recog nizing that our basic nature has the three aspects of essence, nature and capacity: an essence that is nonarising, a nature that is unob structed, and a capacity that is ever-present, all-pervasive. These qualities are, in fact, the three kayas of the buddha mind, and they are present in everyone already. This is our basic nature. 
What normally happens, in philosophical terms, is that this nature becomes obscured by the two veils, the two obscurations. In terms of simple practice, this means that the moment the meditator thinks about something, there is no longer the knowing of how this essence, nature and capacity actually is. In other words, the present thought obscures the knowing of the innate nature. Our thinking is the obscuration that fools us. We then fall under the power of negative emotions and karma. 
To deal with this tendency, thoroughly, 
Instead, recognize the identity of the thinkerAnd allow present wakefulness
To be totally fresh, bare and naked. 
Leave awareness in its naked state. 
Do not correct or modify anything whatsoever. 
Maintain a slight presence of mind, 
As a small reminder. 
Once you are carried away
And start to think of other things, 
This reminder immediately brings you back; 
Back to the basic state
That is not an act of meditating, 
Yet it is not distracted. 
It is simply the naked state of mind. 
To allow that to be as it naturally is
Without altering or correcting it in any way, 
That training is itself the very heart
Of all the Buddha's teachings. 
Samsara does not exist apart from our own thinking. Our think ing is samsara. Our thinking is karma; it is disturbing emotion. When thinking is allowed to take the upper hand - if we give in to what is being thought of- the stream of samsara remains unbro ken; deluded samsaric experience goes on and on. To turn away from samsara means to turn away from deluded experience, to turn away from this thinking. Even a moment of thinking anything, whether in a negative way or a positive way, still creates an habitual tendency, a habit. Until the point where this thinking falls apart, karma is still being formed and disturbing emotions are still being created. It is like the shadow of the hand being there. As long as karma and habits are formed, we risk being overcome by them. We need to stop this flow. 
In a very detailed sense, you can say there are eighty-four thou sand different types of disturbing emotions. But, more briefly, we can identify six primary and twenty subsidiary disturbing emotions. There are also so many, many types of karma: there is virtuous karma, there is unvirtuous karma and neutral karma - but the bot tom line is that there is no karma formed that is separate from the mind's clinging. 
In short, we need to clear up karma and disturbing emotions. Our ability to clear up the formation of karma and disturbing emo tions depends entirely upon our conceptual attitude. When our mind clings, disturbing emotions arise and karma is made. The mind clings when there is a conceptual attitude and that causes all the deluded experiences of samsara to unfold. In other words, as long as mind clings or holds a conceptual attitude, there is no recog nizing our natural face, our innate nature. The moment this clinging is absent - the moment it dissolves, the moment it vanishes - the innate nature is just simply present, and yet it is fully endowed with all perfect qualities. You can call it whatever you want, but it is the original ground, your mind essence. 
That which covers up innate nature or mind essence is the conceptual attitude of our thinking. This thinking, whether it be of 'Nice!' or 'Not nice!', whether it be virtuous, unvirtuous, or neutral, is our habit. We have grown fond of thinking of this and that. The situation right now is that we do not really want to give up conceptual thinking, which is the root cause of samsara, yet at the same time we want to be free. Even when you truly want to give up conceptualiz ing and actually try to do it, you may not be totally sure of how to go about it. Another thought cannot free us of thinking. One more thought cannot make us free of thought. A new kind of clinging, a new conceptual attitude, cannot obliterate the conceptual state. Only the state of nonclinging, the wakefulness that does not conceptualize, can totally put an end to thinking. Thought-free wakefulnesscan cut through the very root of conceptual mind for good.
As I mentioned earlier, in Dzogchen, the main practice is to sepa rate dualistic mind and rigpa. Dualistic mind means the state of being involved in the three spheres of concept: subject, object, and action. Dualistic mind continually judges and analyzes. This act of judging has two phases. The first one is conception, a vague impression, like "There is a house." The second, discernment, is to look closely and to evaluate exacdy what type of house it is, investigating the conception in detail. All thought activity has these two stages. Rigpa, on the other hand, is not caught up in judging. It is wide open. The identity of rigpa, the moment of rigpa, is free from both coarse and sub de judging. That is why the tradition of pith instruction describes the awakened state of rigpa as utterly naked. 
Rigpa is vividly present, 
Wide awake. 
A moment of no thought, 
Not caught up in judging. 
Rigpa is empty, and at the same time cognizant. 
Cognizant and at the same time empty, 
Utterly naked awareness. 
Do not focus outwardly. 
Do not concentrate inwardly. 
Do not place the attention in between. 
Let be without even as much as a hair-tip of mental doing. 
